
Tamburlain  
the Great. 
 
Who, from a Scythian Shephearde,  
by his rare and woonderfull Conquests,  
became a most puissant and migh­ 
tye Monarque.  

And (for his tyranny, and terrour in  
Warre) was tearmed,  
The Scourge of God. 
 
Deuided into two Tragicall Dis­ 
courses, as they were sundrie times  
shewed vpon Stages in the Citie  
of London.  

By the right honorable the Lord  
Admyrall, his seruantes. 
 
Now first, and newlie published. 
 
LONDON.  

Printed by Richard Ihones: at the signe  
of the Rose and Crowne neere Hol­ 
borne Bridge. 1590.  


To the GentlemenRea­
ders: and others that take pleasure 
in reading Histories. 



GEntlemen, and curteous Readers whoso­
euer: I haue here published in print for 
your sakes, the two tragical Discourses of 
the Scythian Shepheard, Tamburlaine, that 
became so great a Conquerour, and so mightie 
a Monarque: My hope is, that they wil be now 
no lesse acceptable vnto you to read after your 
serious affaires and studies, then they hauebene 
(lately) delightfullfor many of you to see, when 
the same were shewed in London vpon stages: 
I haue (purposely) omitted and left out some f
ond and friuolousIestures, digressing (and in 
my poore opinion) far vnmeet for the matter, 
which I thought, might seeme moretedious 
vnto the wise, than any way els to be regarded, 
though (happly) they haue bene of some vaine 
coceited fondlings greatly gaped at, what times 
they were shewed vpon thestage in their gra­
ced deformities: neuertheles now, to be mixtu­
red in print with such matter of worth, it wuld 
prooue a great disgrace to so honorable & state­ 
ly a historie: Great folly were it in me, to com­ 
mend vnto your wisedomes, either the elo­ 
quence of the Authour that writ them, or the  
worthinesse of the matter it selfe; I therefore  
leaue vnto your learned censures, both the one  
and the other, and my selfe the poore printer of  
them vnto your most curteous and fauourable  
protection; which if you vouchsafe to accept,  
you shall euermore binde mee to imploy what  
trauell and seruice I can, to the aduauncing and  
pleasuring of your excellent degree. 
 
Yours, most humble at com=  
maundement,  

R. I. Printer  

The tvvo tragical Dis 
courses of mighty Tamburlaine, the 
Scythian Shepheard. &c. 

The Prologue.
 
FRom iygging vaines of riming mother wits, 
And such conceits as clownage keepes in pay, 
Weele lead you to the stately tent of War. 
Where you shall heare the Scythian Tamburlaine:
Threatning the world with high astounding tearms 
And scourging kingdoms with his coquering sword 
View but his picture in this tragicke glasse, 
And then applaud his fortunes as you please. 
 
Actus. 1. Scæna. 1. 

Mycetes, Cosroe, Meander, Theridamas, Ortygius, 
Ceneus, with others. 

BRother Cosroe, I find my selfe agreeu’d, 
Yet insufficient to expresse the same: 
For it requires a great and thundring speech: 
Good brother tell the cause vnto my Lords, 
I know you haue a better wit than I. 

Unhappie Persea, that in former age 
Hast bene the seatof mightieConquerors, 
That in their prowesse and their pollicies, 
Haue triumpht ouer Affrike, and the bounds 
Of Europe, wher the Sun dares scarce appeare, 
For freezingmeteors and coniealed colde: 
Now to be rulde and gouernedby a man, 
At whose byrth=day Cynthia with Saturne ioinde, 
And Ioue, the Sun and Mercurie denied 
To shed his influence in his fickle braine, 
Now Turkes and Tartars shake their swords at th[··] 
Meaning to mangle all thy Prouinces,

Brother, I see your meaning well enough. 
And thorough your Planets I perceiue you thinke, 
I am not wise enough to be a kinge, 
But I referme to my noble men, 
That knowe my wit, and can be witnesses: 
I might commandyou to be slaine for this, 
Meander, might I not?

Not for so small a fault my soueraigne Lord 

I meane it not, but yet I know I might, 
Yet liue, yea, liue, Mycetes wils it so: 
Meander, thou my faithfull Counsellor, 
Declare the cause of my conceiued griefe, 
Which is (God knowes) about that Tamburlaine. 
That like a Foxe in midst of haruest time, 
Dooth pray vpnon my flockes of Passengers. 
And as I heare, doth meane to pull my plumes, 
Therefore tis good and meete for to be wise.

Oft haue I heard your Maiestie complain, 
Of Tamburlaine, that sturdie Scythian thiefe, 
That robs your merchants of Persepolis, 
Treading by land vnto the Westerne Isles, 
And in your confines withhis lawlesse traine, 
Daily commits inciuill outrages. 
Hoping (misled by dreaming prophesies) 
To raigne in Asia, and with barbarous Armes, 
To make himselfe the Monarch ofthe East: 
But ere he march in Asia, or display 
His vagrant Ensigne inthe Persean fields, 
Your Grace hathtaken order by Theridimas, 
Chardg’d with a thousand horse, to apprehend 
And bring him Captiue to your Highnesse throne, 

Ful true thou speakst, & like thy selfe my lord 
Whom I may tearme a Damon for thy loue. 
Therefore tis best, if so it lik you all, 
To send my thousand horse incontinent, 
To apprehend that paltrie Scythian. 
How like you this, my honorable Lords? 
Is it not a kingly resolution? 

It cannot choose, because it comes from you. 

Then heare thy charge, valiant Theridimas 
The chiefest Captaine of Mycetes hoste, 
The hope of Persea, and the verie legges 
Whereon our statedoth leane, as on a staffe, 
That holds vs vp, and foiles our neighbour foes, 
Thou shaltbe leader of this thousand horse, 
Whose foming galle with rage and high disdaine, 
Haue sworne the deathof wicked Tamburlaine. 
Go frowning foorth, but comethou smyling home, 
As did Sir Paris with theGrecian Dame, 
Returne with speed, time passeth swift away, 
Our lifeis fraile, and we may die to day. 

Before the Moone renew her borrowed light, 
Doubt not my Lord and gratious Soueraigne, 
But Tamburlaine, and that Tartarian rout, 
Shall either perish by our warlike hands, 
Or plead for mercie atyour highnesse feet. 

Go, stout Theridimas, thy words areswords 
And with thy lookesthou conquerest all thy foes: 
I long to see thee back returne from thence, 
That I may view these milk­white steeds of mine. 
All loden with the heads of killed men, 
And from their knees, euen to their hoofes below, 
Besmer’d with blood, that makes a dainty show. 

Then now my Lord, I humbly take my leaue. 

Therid. farewel ten thousand times, 

(Exit. 

Ah, Menaphon, why staiest thouthus behind, 
When other men prease forward for renowne: 
Go Menaphon, go into Scythia, 
And foot by foot follow Theridamas: 

Nay, pray you let him stay,a greater 
Fits Menaphon, than warring with a Thiefe: 
Create him Prorex of Affrica, 
That he may win the Babylonians hearts, 
Which willreuolt from Persean gouernment, 
Unlesse they haue a wiser king than you. 

Unlesse they hauea wiser king than you? 
These are his words, Meander set them downe. 

And ad this to them, that all Asia 
Lament to see the follie of their King.

Well here I sweare by this my royal seat. 

You may doe welltokisse it then. 

Embost with silke asbest beseemes my state. 
To be reueng’d for these contemptuous words. 
O where is dutie and allegeance now? 
Fled to the Caspean or the Ocean maine? 
What, shall I call thee brother? 
No, a foe, Monster of Nature, shame vntothy stocke, 
That dar st presume thy Soueraigne for tomocke. 
Meander come, I am abus’d Meander. 

Exit. 

Manent Cosroe & Menaphon. 

How now my Lord, what, mated and amaz’d 
To hearethe king thus thraten like himselfe? 

Ah Menaphon, I passe not for his threates, 
The plot is laid by Persean Noble men, 
And Captaines of the Medean garrisons, 
To crowne me Emperour of Asia, 
But this it is that doth excruciate 
The verie substance of my vexed soule: 
To see our neighbours that were woont to quake 
And tremble at the Persean Monarkes name, 
Now sits and laughs our regiment to scorne, 
And that which might resolue me into teares: 
Men from thefarthest Equinoctiall line, 
Haue swarm’d in troopes into theEasterne India: 
Lading their shippes with golde and pretious stones: 
And made their spoiles from all our prouinces. 

This should intreat your highnesse to reioice, 
Since Fortune giues you opportunity, 
To gaine the tytle of a Conquerour, 
By curing of this maimed Emperie, 
Affrike and Europe borderingon your land, 
And continent to your Dominions: 
How easely may you with a mightie hoste, 
Passe into Græcia, as did Cyrus once. 
And cause them to withdraw their forces home, 
Least you subdue the pride of Christendome.? (sound 

But Menaph. what means this trumpets 

Behold, my Lord Ortigius, and the rest, 
Bringing the Crowne to make you Emperour. 

Enter Ortigius & Conerus bearing a Crowne 
with others. 

Magnificent and mightie Prince Cosroe, 
We in the name of otherPersean states, 
And commons of this mightie Monarchie, 
Present thee with th’Emperiall Diadem. 

The warlike Souldiers, & the Gentlemen, 
That heretofore haue fild Persepolis 
With Affrike Captaines, taken in the field: 
Whose ransome made them martch in coates of gold, 
With costlie iewels hanging attheir eares, 
And shining stones vpon their loftie Crestes, 
Now liuing idle in the walled townes, 
Wanting both pay and martiall discipline. 
Begin in troopes to threaten ciuill warre. 
And openly exclaime against the King. 
Therefore to stay all sodaine mutinies, 
We will inuest your Highnesse Emperour: 
Whereat the Souldiers will conceiue more ioy,
Then did theMacedonians at the spoile Of great 
Darius and his wealthy hoast. 

Wel, since I see the state of Persea droope, 
And languish in my brothers gouernment: 
I willingly receiue th’mperiall crowne, 
And vow to weare it for mycountries good: 
In spight of them shall malice my estate. 

And in assurance of desir’d successe, 
We here doo crowne thee Monarch of the East, 
Emperour of Asia, and of Persea, 
Great Lord of Medea and Armenia: 
Duke of Affrica and Albania, 
Mesopotamia and of Parthia, 
East India and the late discouered Isles, 
Chiefe Lord of all the wide vast Euxine sea, 
And of the euer raging Caspian Lake: 
Long liue Cosroe mighty Emperour. 

And Ioue may neuer let me longer liue, 
Then I may seeke to gratifie your loue,
And cause the souldiers that thus honour me, 
To triumph ouer many Prouinces. 
By whose desires of discipline in Armes, 
I doubt not shortly but to raigne sole king, 
And with the Armie of Theridamas, 
Whether we presently will flie (my Lords) 
To rest secure against my brothers force. (crowne, 

We knew my Lord, before we broughtthe 
Intending your inuestion so neere, 
The residence of your dispised brother, 
The Lord would not be too exasperate, 
To iniure or suppresse your woorthy tytle. 
Or if they would, there are in readines 
Ten thousand horse to carieyou from hence, 
In spite of all suspected enemies. 

I know it wel my Lord, & thanke you all.

Sound vp the trumpets then, 
God saue the King. 

Exeunt. 

Actus. 1. Scœna. 2:
 
Tamburlaine leading Zenocrate: Techelles, Vsu­
measane, other Lords and Souldiers loden 
with treasure. 

COme lady, let not this appalyour thoughts 
The iewels and thetreasure we haue tane 
Shall be reseru’d, and you in better state, 
Than if youwere arriu’d in Siria. 
Euen in the circle of your Fathers armes: 
The mightie Soldan of Egyptia. 

Ah Shepheard, pity my distressed plight, 
(If as thou seem’st, thou art so meane a man) 
And seeke not to inrich thy followers, 
By lawlesse rapine from a silly maide. 
Who traueiling with these Medean Lords 
To Memphis, from my vncles country of Medea, 
Where allmy youth I hauebene gouerned, 
Haue past the armie ofthe mightie Turke: 
Bearing his priuie signet and his hand: 
To safe conductvs thorow Affrica: 

And since we haue arriu’d in Scythia, 
Besides rich presents from the puisant Cham, 
We haue his highnesse letters to command 
Aide and assistance if we stand inneed. 

But now you see these letters & commandes, 
Are countermanded by a greater man: 
And through my prouincesyou must expect 
Letters ofc onduct from my mightinesse, 
If you intend tokeep your treasure safe. 
But since I loue to liue atliberty, 
As easely may you get the Souldans crowne, 
As any prizes out of my precinct. 
For they are friends that help to weane my state, 
Till men and kingdomes help to strengthen it: 
And must maintaine my life exempt from seruitude. 
But tell me Maddam, is your grace betroth’d? 

I am (my Lord,) for so you do import. 

I am a Lord, for so my deeds shall prooue, 
And yet a shepheard by my Parentage: 
But Lady, this faire face and heauenly hew,
Must grace his bed that conquers Asia: 
And meanes to be a terrour to the world, 
Measuring the limits of his Emperie 
By East and west, as Phæbus doth his course: 
Liehere ye weedes that I disdaine to weare, 
This compleat armor, and this curtle=axe 
Are adiuncts more beseeming Tamburlaine. 
And Maddam, whatsoeuer you esteeme 
Of this successe, and losse vnvallued, 
Both may inuest you Empresse of the East: 
And these that seeme but silly country Swaines, 
May haue the leading of so great an host, 
As with their waight shall make the mountains quake. 
Euen as when windy exhalations, 
Fighting for passage, tilt within the earth. 

As princely Lions when they rouse themselues, 
Stretthing their pawes, and threatningheardes of (Beastes. 
So in his Armour looketh Tamburlaine: 
Me thinks I see kings kneeling at his feet, 
And he with frowning browes and fiery lookes, 
Spurning their crownes fromoff their captiue heads.

And making thee and me Techelles, kinges, 
That euen to death will follow Tamburlaine. 

Nobly resolu’d, sweet friendsand followers, 
These Lords (perhaps) do scorne our estimates: 
And thinke we prattle with distempered spirits, 
But since they measure our deserts so meane, 
That in conceit bear Empires on our speares, 
Affecting thoughts coequall with the cloudes, 
They shall be kept our forced followers, 
Till with their eies thee view vs Emperours.

The Gods, defendersof the innocent, 
Will neuer prosper your intended driftes, 
That thus oppresse poore friendles passengers.  
Therefore at least admit vs libertie, 
Euen as thou hop’st to be eternized, 
By liuing Asias mightie Emperour. 

I hope our Ladies treasure and our owne, 
May serue for ransome to our liberties: 
Returne our Mules and emptie Camelsbacke, 
That we may traueile into Siria, 
Where her betrothed Lord Alcidamus, 
Expects th’arriuall of her highnesse person. 

And wheresoeuer we repose our selues, 
We will report but wellof Tamburlaine. 

Disdaines Zenocrate toliue with me? 
Or you my Lordes to be my followers? 
Thinke you I way this treasuremorethan you? 
Not all the Gold in Indias welthy armes, 
Shall buy the meanest souldier in my traine. 
Zenocrate, louelier than the Loue of Ioue, 
Brighter thanis the siluer Rhodolfe, 
Fairer than whitest snow on Scythian hils, 
Thy person is more woorth to Tamburlaine, 
Than the possession of the Persean Crowne. 
Which gratious starres haue promist at my birth, 
A hundreth Tartars shall attend on thee, 
Mounted on Steeds, swifter than Pegasus. 
Thy Garments shall be made of Medean silke, 
Enchast with precious iuelles of mine owne: 
More rich and valurous than Zenocrates. 
With milke=white Hartes vpon an Iuorie sled, 
Thou shaltbe drawen amidst thefrosen Pooles, 
And scale the ysie mountaines loftytops: 
Which with thy beautie will be soone resolu’d.
My martiall prises withfiuehundred men, 
Wun on the fiftie headed Vuolgas waues. 
Shall all we offer to Zenocrate, 
And then my selfe tofaire Zenocrate. 

What now? In loue? 

Techelles, women must beflatered. 
But this is she with whom I am in loue.
 
Enter a Souldier.

Newes, newes. 

How now, what’s the matter? 

A thousand Persean horsmenare at hand, 
Sent from the King to ouercome vs all. 

How now my Lords of Egypt & Zenocrate? 
Now must your iewels berestor’d againe: 
And I that triumpht so be ouercome. H
ow say you Lordings, Is not this your hope? 

We hope your selfewil willingly restorethe. 

Such hope, such fortune haue the thousand 
Soft ye my Lords and sweet Zenocrate. (horse. 
You must be forced fromme ere you goe: 
A thousand horsmen? We fiue hundred foote? 
An ods too great, for vs tostand against: 
But are they rich? And is their armour good? 

Their plumed helmes are wrought with 
(beaten golde. 
Their swords enameld, and about their neckes 
Hangs massiechaines of golde downe to the waste, 
In euery part exceeding braue and rich. 

Then shall we fight couragiously with them. 
Or looke you, I should play the Orator? 

No: cowards and fainthearted runawaies, 
Looke for orations when the foe is neere. 
Our swordes shall play the Orators for vs. 

Come letvs meetthem at the mountain foot, 
And with a sodaine and anhot alarme 
Driue all their horses headlong down the hill. 

Come let vs martch.

Stay Techelles, aske a parlee first, 

The Souldiers enter. 

Open the Males, yet guard thetreasure sure, 
Lay out our golden wedges to the view, 
That their reflexions may amaze the Perseans. 
And looke we friendly on them when they come: 
But if they offer word orviolence, 
Weele fight fiue hundred men at armes to one, 
Before we part with our possession. 
And gainst the Generall we will lift our swords. 
And either lanch his greedy thirsting throat, 
Or take him prisoner, and his chaine shallserue 
For Manackles, tillhe be ransom’d home. 

I heare themcome, shal we encounter them? 

Keep all your standings, and not stir a foote, 
My selfe will bide the danger of the brunt.
 
Enter Theridamas with others. 

Where is this Scythian Tamberlaine? 

Who seekst thou Persean? I am Taburlain.

Tamburlaine? AScythian Shepheard, 
(so imbellished 
With Natures pride, and richest furniture, 
His looks do menace heauen and dare the Gods, 
His fierie eies are fixt vpon theearth. 
As if he now deuis’d some Stratageme: 
Or meant to pierce Auernas darksome vaults. 
To pull the triple headed dog from hell. 

Noble and milde this Persean seemesto be, 
If outward habit iudge the inward man, 

Hisdeep affections make him passionate. 

With whata maiesty he rears his looks: 
In thee (thou valiant man of Persea) 
I see the folly of thy Emperour: 
Art thou but Captaine ofa thousand horse, 
That by Characters grauen in thy browes, 
And by thy martiall face and stout aspect, 
Deseru’st to haue the leading of an hoste? 
Forsake thy king and do but ioine with me 
And we will triumph ouer all the world. 
I hold the Fates bound fast in yron chaines, 
And with my hand turne Fortunes wheel about, 
And sooner shall the Sun fall from his Spheare, 
Than Tamburlaine be slaine or ouercome. 
Draw foorth thy sword, thou mighty man at Armes, 
Intending but to rase my charmed skin: 
And Ioue himselfe will stretch his hand from heauen. 
To ward the blow, and shield mesafe from harme, 
See how he raines down heaps of gold in showers. 
As if he meant to giue my Souldiers pay,
And as a sureand groundedargument, 
That I shall be the Monark of the East. 
He sends this Souldans daughter rich and braue,
To be my Queen and portly Emperesse, 
If thou wilt stay with me, renowmed man, 
And lead thy thousand horse with my conduct, 
Besides thy share ofthis Egyptian prise, 
Those thousand horse shall sweat with martiall spoile 
Of conquered kingdomes, and of Cities sackt, 
Both we wil walke vpon the lofty clifts,  
And Christian Merchants that with Russian stems  
Plow vp huge furrowes in the Caspian sea.  
Shall vaile to vs, as Lords of all the Lake.  
Both we will raigne as Consuls of the earth,  
And mightie kings shall be our Senators,  
Ioue sometime masked in a Shepheards weed,  
And by those steps that he hath scal’d the heauens,  
May we become immortall like the Gods.  
Ioine with me now in this my meane estate,  
(I cal it meane, because being yet obscure,  
The Nations far remoou’d admyre me not)  
And when my name and honor shall be spread,  
As far as Boreas claps his brazen wings,  
Or faire Botëes sends his cheerefull light.  
Then shalt thou be Competitor with me,  
And sit with Tamburlaine in all his maiestie.  

Not Hermes Prolocutor to the Gods,  
Could vse perswasions more patheticall.  

Nor are Apollos Oracles more true,  
Then thou shalt find my vaunts substantiall.  

We are his friends, and if the Persean king  
Should offer present Dukedomes to our state,  
We thinke it losse to make exchange for that,  
We are assured of by our friends successe.  

And kingdomes at the least we all expect.  
Befides the honor in assured conquestes:  
Where kings shall crouch vnto our conquering swords,  
And hostes of souldiers stand amaz’d at vs,  
When with their fearfull tongues they shall confesse  
Theise are the men that all the world admires, (soule  

What stronge enchantments tice my yeelding  
Are these resolued noble Scythians?  
But shall I prooue a Traitor to my King?  

No, but the trustie friend of Tamburlaine.  

Won with thy words, & conquered with thy  
I yeeld my selfe, my men & horse to thee: (looks,  
To be partaker of thy good or ill,  
As long as life maintaines Theridamas.  

Theridamas my friend, take here my hand.  
Which is as much as if I swore by heauen,  
And call’d the Gods to witnesse of my vow,  
Thus shall my heart be still combinde with thine,  
Untill our bodies turne to Elements:  
And both our soules aspire celestiall thrones.  
Techelles, and Casane, welcome him.  

Welcome renowmed Persean to vs all.  

Long may theridamas remaine with vs.  

These are my friends in who I more reioice,  
Than dooth the King of Persea in his Crowne:  
And by the loue of Pyllades and Orestes,  
Whose statutes we adore in Scythia,  
Thy selfe and them shall neuer part from me,  
Before I crowne you kings in Asia.  
Make much of them gentle Theridamas,  
And they will neuer leaue thee till the death.  

Nor thee, nor them, thrice noble Tamburlain  
Shal want my heart to be with gladnes pierc’d  
To do you honor and securitie.  

A thousand thankes worthy theridamas:  
And now faire Madam, and my noble Lords,  
If you will willingly remaine with me,  
You shall haue honors, as your merits be:  
Or els you shall be forc’d wtth slauerie.  

We yeeld vnto thee happie Tamburlaine  

For you then Maddam, I am out of doubt  

I must be pleasde perforce, wretched  
(Zenocrate.  

Exeunt  
Actus. 2. Scœna. 1. 
 
Cosroe, Menaphon, Ortygius, Ceneus, with  
other Souldiers.  
  
THus farre are we towards Theridamas,  
And valiant Tamburlaine, the man of fame,  
The man that in the forhead of his fortune,  
Beares figures of renowne and myracle:  
But tell me, that hast seene him, Menaphon,  
What stature wields he, and what personage?  

Of stature tall, and straightly fashioned,  
Like his desire, lift vpwards and diuine,  
Sa large of lims, his ioints so strongly knit,  
Such breadth of shoulders as might mainely beare  
Olde Atlas burthen, twixt his manly pitch,  
A pearle more worth, then all the world is plaste:  
Wherein by curious soueraintie of Art,  
Are fixt his piercing instruments of sight:  
Whose fiery cyrcles beare encompassed  
A heauen of heauenly bodies in their Spheares:  
That guides his steps and actions to the throne.  
Where honor sits inuested royally:  
Pale of complexion: wrought in him with passion,  
Thrirsting with souerainty with loue of armes,  
His lofty browes in foldes, do figure death,  
And in their smoothnesse, amitie and life:  
About them hangs a knot of Amber heire.  
Wrapped in curles, as fierce Achilles was,  
On which the breath of heauen delights to play,  
Making it daunce with wanton maiestie:  
His armes and fingers long and snowy,  
Betokening valour and excesse of strength:  
In euery part proportioned like the man,  
Should make the world subdued to Tamburlaine.  

Wel hast thou pourtraid in thy tearms of life,  
The face and personage of a woondrous man:  
Nature doth striue with Fortune and his stars,  
To make him famous in accomplisht woorth:  
And well his merits show him to be made:  
His Fortunes maister, and the king of men.  
That could perswade at such a sodaine pinch,  
With reasons of his valour and his life,  
A thousand sworne and ouermatching foes:  
Then when our powers in points of swords are ioin’d  
And closde in compasse of the killing bullet,  
Though straight the passage and the port be made,  
That leads to Pallace of my brothers life,  
Proud is his fortune if we pierce it not.  
And when the princely Persean Diadem,  
Shall ouerway his wearie witlesse head,  
And fall like mellowed fruit, with shakes of death,  
In faire Persea noble tamburlaine  
Shall be my Regent, and remaine as King:  

In happy hower we haue set the Crowne  
Upon your kingly head, that seeks our honor,  
In ioyning with the man, ordain’d by heauen  
To further euery action to the best.  

He that with Shepheards and a litle spoile, 
Durst in disdaine ofwrong and tyrannie, 
Defendhis freedome gainst a Monarchie. 
What will he doe supported by a king? 
Leading a troope of Gentlemenand Lords, 
And stuft with trasure for his highest thoughts, 

And such shall wait on worthy Tamburlaine. 
Our army will be forty thousand strong, 
When Tamburlain and braue Theridamas 
Haue met vs by the riuer Araris: 
And all conioin’d to meet the witlesse King. 
That now is marching neerto Parthia. 
And with vnwilling souldiers faintly arm’d, 
To seeke reuenge on me and Tamburlaine. 
To whom sweet Menaphon, direct me straight.

I will my Lord. Exeunt
 
Act. 2. Scæna. 2, 

Mycetes, Meander, with other Lords and Souldiers. 

COme my Meander, let vs to this geere, 
I tel you true my heart isswolne with wrath, 
On this same theeuish villaine tamburlaine. 
And of that false Cosroe, my traiterous brother 
Would it not grieue a King to be so abusde. 
And haue a thousand horsmen tane away? 
And which is worst to haue his Diadem 
Sought for by such scalde knauesas louehim not? 
I thinke it would: wel then, by heauens I sweare, 
Aurora shall not peepe out of her doores, 
But I will haue Cosroe by the head,  
And kill proud Tamburlaine with point of sword.  
Tell you the rest (Meander) I haue said.  

Then hauing past Armenian desarts now,  
And pitch our tents vnder the Georgean hilles.  
Whose tops are couered with Tartarian thieues,  
That lie in ambush, waiting for a pray:  
What should we doe but bid them battaile straight,  
And rid the world of those detested troopes?  
Least if we let them lynger here a while,  
They gather strength by power of fresh supplies.  
This countrie swarmes with vile outragious men,  
That liue by rapine and by lawlesse spoile,  
Fit Souldiers for the wicked Tamburlaine.  
And he that could with giftes and promises.  
Inueigle him that lead a thousand horse,  
And make him false his faith vnto his King,  
Will quickly win such as are like himselfe.  
Therefore cheere vp your mindes, prepare to fight,  
He that can take or slaughter tamburlaine,  
Shall rule the Prouince of Albania.  
Who brings that Traitors head theridamas,  
Shal haue a gouernment in Medea:  
Beside the spoile of him and all his traine:  
But if Cosroe (as our Spials say,  
And as we know) remaines with tamburlaine,  
His Highnesse pleasure is that he should liue,  
And be reclaim’d with princely lenitie.  

An hundred horsmen of my company  
Scowting abroad vpon these champion plaines,  
Haue view’d the army of the Scythians,  
Which make reports it far exceeds the Kings.  

Suppose they be in number infinit,  
Yet being void of Martiall discipline,  
All running headlong after greedy spoiles:  
And more regarding gaine than victory:  
Like to the cruell brothers of the earth,  
Sprong of the teeth of Dragons venomous,  
Their carelesse swords shal lanch their fellowes throats  
And make vs triumph in their ouerthrow.  

Was there such brethren, sweet Meander, say  
That sprong of teeth of Dragons venomous.  

So Poets say, my Lord.  

And tis a prety toy to be a Poet.  
Wel, wel (Meander) thou art deeply read:  
And hauing thee, I haue a iewell sure:  
Go on my Lord, and giue your charge I say,  
Thy wit will make vs Conquerors to day.  

Then noble souldiors, to intrap these theeues,  
That liue confounded in disordered troopes,  
If wealth or riches may preuaile with them,  
We haue our Cammels laden all with gold:  
Which you that be but common souldiers,  
Shall fling in euery corner of the field:  
And while the base borne Tartars take it vp,  
You fighting more for honor than for gold,  
Shall massacre those greedy minded slaues.  
And when their scattered armie is subdu’d:  
And you march on their slaughtered carkasses,  
Share equallly the gold that bought their liues,  
And liue like Gentlemen in Persea,  
Strike vp the Drum and martch corragiously,  
Fortune her selfe dooth sit vpon our Crests.  

He tels you true, my maisters, so he does.  
Drums, why sound ye not whe Meand. speaks.  

Exeunt  

Actus. 2. Scæna. 3. 
Cosroe, Tamburlaine, Theridamas, Techelles, Vsu­
measane, Ortygius. with others. 

NOw worthy Tamburlaine, haue I reposde, 
In thy approoued Fortunes all my hope, 
What thinkst thou man, shal come of our at= 
(temptes. 
For euen as from assured oracle, 
I take thy doome for satisfaction. 

And so mistakeyou not a whit my Lord. 
For Fates and Oracles, heauen haue sworne, 
To roialise the deedes of tamburlaine: 
And make them blest that share in his attemptes. 
And doubt you not, but if you fauour me, 
And letmy Fortunes and my valour sway, 
To some direction in your martiall deeds, 
The world will striue with hostes of men at armes. 
To swarme vntothe Ensigne I support, 
The host of Xerxes, which by fame is said 
To drinke the mightie Parthian Araris, 
Was but a handful to that we will haue. 
Our quiuering Lances shaking in the aire, 
And bullets like Ioues dreadfull Thunderbolts,
Enrolde in flames and fiery smoldering mistes, 
Shall threat the Gods more than Cyclopian warres, 
And with our Sun=bright armour as we march, 
Weel chase the Stars from heauen, and dim their eies 
That stand and muse at our admyred armes. 

You see my Lord, what woorking woordes (he hath. 
But when you see his actions stop his speech,  
Your speech will stay, or so extol his worth,  
As I shall be commended and excusde  
For turning my poore charge to his direction.  
And these his two renowmed friends my Lord,  
Would make one thrust and striue to be retain’d  
In such a great degree of amitie.  

With dutie not with amitie we yeeld  
Our vtmost seruice to the faire Cosroe.  

Which I esteeme as portion of my crown.  
Vsumeasane and techelles both,  
When she that rules in Rhamnis golden gates,  
And makes a passage for all prosperous Armes:  
Shall make me solely Emperour of Asia,  
Then shall your meeds and vallours be aduaunst  
To roomes of honour and Nobilitie.  

Then haste Cosroe to be king alone.  
That I with these my friends and all my men,  
May triumph in our long expected Fate,  
The King your Brother is now hard at hand,  
Meete with the foole, and rid your royall shoulders  
Of such a burthen, as outwaies the sands  
And all the craggie rockes of Caspea.  

My Lord, we haue discouered the enemie  
Ready to chardge you with a mighty armie.  

Come tamburlain, now whet thy winged sword  
And lift thy lofty arme into the cloudes,  
That it may reach the King of Perseas crowne,  
And set it safe on my victorious head.  

See where it is, the keenest Cutle=axe.  
That ere made passage thorow Persean Armes,  
These are the wings shall make it flie as swift,  
As dooth the lightening: or the breath of heauen,  
And kill as sure as it swiftly flies.  

Thy words assure me of kind successe:  
Go valiant Souldier, go before and charge  
The fainting army of that foolish King.  

Vsumeasane and techelles come,  
We are enough to scarre the enemy,  
And more than needes to make an Emperour.
  
To the Battaile, and Mycetes comes out alone with  
his Crowne in his hand offering to hide it.  

Accurst be he that first inuented war,  
They knew not, ah, they knew not simple men,  
How those were hit by pelting Cannon shot,  
Stand staggering like a quiuering Aspen leafe,  
Fearing the force of Boreas boistrous blasts.  
In what a lamentable case were I,  
If Nature had not giuen me wisedomes lore?  
For Kings are clouts that euery man shoots at,  
Our Crowne the pin that thousands seeke to cleaue,  
Therefore in pollicie I thinke it good  
To hide it close: a goodly Stratagem,  
And far from any man that is a foole.  
So shall not I be knowen, or if I bee,  
They cannot take away my crowne from me.  
Here will I hide it in this simple hole.  

Enter Tamburlain.  

What fearful coward stragling from the camp  
When Kings themselues are present in the field.  

Thou liest.  

Base villaine, darst thou giue the lie?  

Away, I am the King: go, touch me not.  
Thou breakst the law of Armes vnlesse thou kneele.  
And cry me mercie, noble King.  
Tam Are you the witty King of Persea?  

I marie am I: haue you any suite to me?  

I would intreat you to speak but three wise  
wordes.  

So I can when I see my time.  

Is this your Crowne?  

I, Didst thou euer see a fairer?  

You will not sell it, wil ye?  

Such another word, and I will haue thee  
executed.  
Come giue it me.  

No, I tooke it prisoner.  

You lie, I gaue it you.  

Then tis mine.  

No, I meane, I let you keep it.  

Wel, I meane you shall haue it againe.  
Here take it for a while, I lend it thee,  
Till I may see thee hem’d with armed men.  
Then shalt thou see me pull it from thy head:  
Thou art no match for mightie Tamburlaine.  

O Gods, is this tamburlaine the thiefe,  
I marueile much he stole it not away. 
 
Sound trumpets to the battell, and he runs in.  
Cosroe, Tamburlaine, Theridamas, Menaphon,  
Meander, Ortygius, Techelles. Vsumeasane,  
with others.  

Holde thee Cosroe, weare two imperiall  
(Crownes.  
Thinks thee Inuested now as royally,  
Euen by the mighty hand of tamburlaine,  
As if as many kinges as could encompasse thee,  
With greatest pompe had crown’d thee Emperour.  

So do I thrice renowmed man at armes,  
And none shall keepe the crowne but tamburlaine:  
Thee doo I make my Regent of Persea,  
And Generall Lieftenant of my Armies.  
Meander, you that were our brothers Guide,  
And chiefest Counsailor in all his acts,  
Since he is yeelded to the stroke of War,  
On your submission we with thanks excuse,  
And giue you equall place in our affaires.  

Most happy Emperour in humblest tearms  
I vow my seruice to your Maiestie.  
With vtmost vertue of my faith and dutie.  

Thanks good Meander, then Cosroe raign  
And gouerne Persea in her former pomp:  
Now send Ambassage to thy neighbor Kings,  
And let them know the Persean King is chang’d:  
From one that knew not what a King should do,  
To one that can commaund what longs thereto:  
And now we will to faire Persepolis,  
With twenty thousand expert souldiers.  
The Lords and Captaines of my brothers campe,  
With litle slaughter take Meanders course,  
And gladly yeeld them to my gracious rule:  
Ortigius and menaphon, my trustie friendes,  
Now will I gratify your former good,  
And grace your calling with a greater sway.  

And as we euer and at your behoofe,  
And sought your state, all honor it deseru’d,  
So will we with our powers and our liues,  
Indeuor to preserue and prosper it.  

I will not thank thee (sweet Ortigius)  
Better replies shall prooue my purposes.  
And now, Lord tamburlaine, my brothers Campe  
I leaue to thee, and to theridamas,  
To follow me to faire Persepolis.  
Then will we march to all those Indian Mines,  
My witlesse brother to the Christians lost:  
And ransome them with fame and vsurie.  
And till thou ouertake me tamburlaine,  
(Staying to order all the scattered troopes)  
Farewell Lord Regent, and his happie friends,  
I long to sit vpon my brothers throne,  

Your Maiestie shall shortly haue your wish.  
And ride in triumph through Persepolis. 

Exeunt.  

Manent Tamb. Tech. Ther. Vsum.  

And ride in triumph through Persepolis?  
Is it not braue to be a King, techelles?  
Vsumeasane and theridamas,  
Is it not passing braue to be a King,  
And ride in triumph through Persepolis?  

O my Lord, tis sweet and full of pompe.  

To be a King, is halfe to be a God.  

A God is not so glorious as a King:  
I thinke the pleasure they enioy in heauen  
Can not compare with kingly ioyes in earth,  
To weare a Crowne enchac’d with pearle and golde,  
Whose vertues carie with it life and death,  
To aske, and haue: command, and be obeied.  
When looks breed loue, with lookes to gaine the prize.  
Such power attractiue shines in princes eies.  

Why say theridamas, wilt thou be a king?  

Nay, though I praise it, I can liue without it.  

What saies my other friends, wil you be kings?  

I, if I could with all my heart my Lord.  

Why, that’s wel said techelles, so would I,  
And so would you my maisters, would you not?  

What then my Lord?  

Why then Casanes shall we wish for ought  
The world affoords in greatest noueltie,  
And rest attemplesse faint and destitute?  
Me thinks we should not, I am strongly moou’d,  
That if I should desire the Persean Crowne,  
I could attaine it with a woondrous ease,  
And would not all our souldiers soone consent,  
If we should aime at such a dignitie?  

I know they would with our perswasions.  

Why then theridamas, Ile first assay,  
To get the Persean Kingdome to my selfe:  
Then thou for Parthia, they for Scythia and Medea.  
And if I prosper, all shall be as sure,  
As if the Turke, the Pope, Affrike and Greece,  
Came creeping to vs with their crownes apace.  

Then shall we send to this triumphing King,  
And bid him battell for his nouell Crowne?  

Nay quickly then, before his roome be hot.  

Twil prooue a pretie iest (in faith) my friends.  

A iest to chardge on twenty thousand men?  
I iudge the purchase more important far.  

Iudge by thy selfe theridamas, not me,  
For presently techelles here shal haste,  
To bid him battaile ere he passe too farre,  
And lose more labor than the gaine will quight.   
Then shalt thou see the Scythian tamburlaine, 
Make but a iest to win the Persean crowne.
techelles, take a thousand horse with thee, 
And bid himturne his back to war with vs, 
That onely made him King to make vs sport. 
We will not stealevpon him cowardly, 
But giue him warning and more warriours. 
Haste the techelles, we will follow thee. 
What saith theridamas? 

Goe on for me.

Exeunt.
  
Actus. 2. Scæna. 6. 
 
Cosroe, Meander, Ortygius, Menaphon, with 
other Souldiers.  

VVhatmeans this diuelish shepheard to aspire 
With such a Giantly presumption. 
To cast vp hils against the face of heauen: 
And dare the force of angrie Iupiter. 
But as he thrust them vnderneath the hils, 
And prest out fire from their burning iawes: 
So will I send this monstrous slaue to hell, 
Where flames shall euer feed vpon his soule. 

Some powers diuine, orels infernall, mixt 
Their angry seeds athis conception: 
For he was neuer sprong ofhumaine race, 
Since with the spirit of his fearefull pride, 
He dares so doubtlesly resolue of rule. 
And by professionbe ambitous. 

What God or Feend, or spirit of the earth, 
Or Monster turned to a manly shape,  
Or of what mouldor mettel he be made, 
What star or state soeuer gouerne him, 
Let vs put on our meetincountring mindes, 
And in detesting such a diuelish Thiefe, 
In loue of honor & defence of right, 
Be arm’d against the hate of such a foe, 
Whether fromearth, or hell, or heauen he grow. 

Nobly resolu’d, my good Ortygius. 
And since we all hauesuckt one wholsome aire, 
And with the same proportion of Elements, 
Resolue, I hope we are resembled, 
Uowing our loues to equall death and life, 
Let’s cheere our souldiers to incounter him, 
That grieuous image of ingratitude: 
That fiery thirster after Soueraingtie: 
And burne himin the fury of that flame, 
That none can quence but blood and Emperie. 
Resolue my Lords and louingsouldiers now, 
To saue your King and country from decay: 
Then strike vp Drum, and all the Starres that make 
The loathsome Circle of my dated life, 
Direct my weapon tohis barbarous heart, 
That thus opposeth him against the Gods, 
And scornes the Powers that gouerne Persea.
 
Enter to the Battell, & after the battell, enter Cosroe 
wounded, Theridamas, tamburlaine, Techelles, 
Vsumeasane, with others. 

Barbarous and bloody Tamburlaine, 
Thus to depriue me of my crowneand life. 
Treacherous and false theridamas, 
Euen at the morning of my happy state,  
Scarce being seated in my royall throne,  
To worke my downfall and vntimely end.  
An vncouth paine torments my grieued soule,  
And death arrests the organe of my voice.  
Who entring at the breach thy sword hath made,  
Sacks euery vaine and artier of my heart,  
Bloody and insatiate Tamburlain.  

The thirst of raigne and sweetnes of a crown,  
That causde the eldest sonne of heauenly Ops,  
To thrust his doting father from his chaire,  
And place himselfe in the Emperiall heauen,  
Moou’d me to manage armes against they state,  
What better president than mightie Ioue?  
Nature that fram’d vs of foure Elements,  
Warring within our breasts for regiment,  
Doth teach vs all to haue aspyring minds:  
Our soules, whose faculties can comprehend  
The wondrous Architecture of the world:  
And measure euery wandring plannets course.  
Still climing after knowledge infinite,  
And alwaies moouing as the restles Spheares.  
Wils vs to weare our selues and neuer rest.  
Until we reach the ripest fruit of all.  
That perfect blisse and sole felicitie.  
The sweet fruition of an earthly crowne.  

And that made me to ioine with tamburlain  
For he is grosse and like the massie earth,  
That mooues not vpwards, nor by princely deeds  
Doth meane to soare aboue the highest sort.  

And that made vs the friends of Tamburlaine.  
To lift our swords against the Persean King.  

For as when Ioue did thrust old Saturn down, 
Neptune and Dis gain’d each of them a Crowne. 
So do we hope to raign in Asia, 
If tamburlain be plac’d in Persea. 

The strangest men that euer nature made, 
I know not how to take their tyrannies. 
My bloodlesse body waxethchill and colde, 
And with my blood my life slides through my wound. 
My soule begins to take her flight to hell. 
And sommons all my sences to depart: 
The heat and moisture which did feed each other, 
For want of nourishment to feed them both. 
Is drie and cold, and now dooth gastly death 
With greedy tallents gripe my bleeding hart, 
And like a Harpyr tires on my life. 
Theridamas and Tamburlaine, I die, 
And fearefull vengeance light vpon you both. 
He takes the Crowne and puts it on. 

Not all the curses which the furies breathe, 
Shall make me leaueso rich a prize as this: 
Theridamas, techelles, and the rest, 
Who thinke you now is king of Persea? 

Tamburlaine, tamburlaine. (armes, 

Though Mars himselfe the angrie God of 
And all the earthly Potentates conspire, 
To dispossesse me of this Diadem: 
Yet will I weare it indespight of them, 
As great commander of this Easterne world, 
If youbut say that tamburlaine shall raigne. 

Long liue tamburlaine, and raigne in Asia. 

So, now it is more surer on my head, 
Than ifthe Gods had helda Parliament: 
And all pronounst me king of Persea. 

Finis Actus 2. Actus. 3. Scæna. 1. 

Baiazeth, the kings of Fess. Moroco, and Argier. 
with others, in great pompe. 

GReat Kings of Barbary, and my portly Bassoes, 
We heare, the Tartars & the Easterne theeues 
Under the conduct of one Tamburlaine, 
Presume a bickering withyour Emperour: 
And thinks to rouse vs from our dreadful siege 
Of the famous Grecian Constantinople. 
You know our Armie is inuincible: 
As many circumcised Turkes we haue, 
And warlike bands of Christians renied, 
As hath the Ocean or the Terrene sea 
Small drops of water, when the Moon begins 
To ioine in one her semi=circled hornes: 
Yet would we not be brau’d with forrainpower, 
Norraise our siege before theGretians yeeld. 
Or breathles lie before the citie walles. 

Renowmed Emperour, and mighty Generall 
What if you sent theBassoes of your guard. 
To charge him to remaine in Asia. 
Or els to threaten death and deadly armes, 
As from the mouth of mighty Baiazeth. 

Hie thee my Bassoe fast to Persea, 
Tell himthy Lord the Turkish Emperour, 
Dread Lord of Affrike, Europe and Asia. 
Great King and conquerourof Grecia, 
The Ocean, Terrene, and the cole=blacke sea, 
The high and higest Monarke of the world. 
Wils and Commands(for say not I intreat) 
Not oncetoset his foot in Affrica, 
Or spread his collours in Grecia. 
Least heincurre the furieof my wrath. 
Tell him, I am content to take a truce, 
Because I heare hebeares a valiant mind. 
But if presuming on his silly power, 
He be so mad to manage Armes with me, 
Then stay thou with him, say I bid thee so. 
And if before the Sunhaue measured heauen 
With triple circuit thou regreet vs not, 
We meane to take his mornings next arise. 
For messenger, he will not be reclaim’d, 
And meane to fetch thee in despight of him. 

Most great and puisant Monarke of the earth, 
Your Bassoe will accomplish your behest: 
And show your pleasure to the Persean. 
As fits the Legate ofthe stately Turk. 

Exit Bass.

They say he is the King of Persea. 
But if he dare attempt to stir your siege, 
Twere requisite heshould be ten times more, 
For allflesh quakes atyour magnificence. 

True (Argier) and tremble at my lookes. 

The spring is hindred by your smoothering 
For neither rain can fall vpon the earth, (host, 
Nor Sun reflexe his vertuous beames thereon. 
The ground is mantled with such multitudes. 

All this is true asholy Mahomet, 
And all the trees are blasted with our breathes. C3 

What thinks your greatnes best to be atchieu’d 
In pursuit of the Cities ouerthrow? 

I wil the captiue Pioners of Argier, 
Cut of the water, that by leaden pipes 
Runs to the citie fromthe mountain Carnon, 
Two thousand horse shall forrage vp and downe, 
That no reliefeor succour come by Land. 
And all the sea my Gallies countermaund. 
Then shallour footmen lie within the trench, 
And with their Cannons mouth’d like Orcus gulfe 
Batter the walles, and we will enter in: 
And thus the Grecians shall be conquered. 

Exeunt 

Actus. 3. Scæna. 2. 

Agidas, Zenocrate, Anippe, 
with others.
 
MAdam Zenocrate, may I presume 
To know the cause of these vnquiet fits: 
That worke such trouble to your woonted rest: 
Tis more then pitty such a heauenly face 
Should by hearts sorrow wax so wan and pale. 
When your offensiue rapeby tamburlaine, 
(Which of your whole displeasures should be most) 
Hath seem’d to be digested long agoe. 

Although it be digested long agoe, 
As his exceding fauours hauedeseru’d, 
And might content the Queene of heauen as well: 
As it hath chang’d my first conceiu’d disdaine. 
Yet since a farther passion feeds my thoughts, 
With ceaselesse and disconsolate conceits. 
Which dies my lookesso liuelesse asthey are. 
And might, if my extreams had full euents, 
Make me the gastly counterfeitof death. 

Eternall heauen sooner be dissolu’d.
And all that pierceth Phœbes siluer eie, 
Before such hap fallto zenocrate. 

Ah, life, and soule still houer inhis Breast. 
And leaue my body sencelesseas the earth. 
Or els vnite you to his life and soule, 
That I may liue and die with tamburlaine. 

Enter Tamburlaine with Techelles and others. 

With tamburlaine? Ah faire zenocrate. 
Let not a manso vile and barbarous, 
That holds you from your father in despight, 
And keeps you from the honors of a Queene. 
Being supposde his worthlesse Concubine. 
Be honored withyour loue, but for necessity. 
So now the mighty Souldan heares of you, 
Your Highnesse needs not doubt but in short time, 
He will with Tamburlaines destruction 
Redeeme you from this deadly seruitude. 

leaue to wound me with these words. 
And speakeof tamburlaine ashe deserues: 
The entertainmentwe hauehad of him, 
Is far from villanie or seruitude. 
And might in noble minds be counted princely. 

How can you fancie one that lookes so fierce, 
Onelie disposed to martiall Stratagems? 
Who when he shall embrace you in his armes, 
Will tell how many thousand men he slew. 
And when you looke for amorous discourse, 
Will rattle foorth his facts ofwar and blood. 
Too harsh a subiectfor your dainty eares. 

As looks thesun through Nilus flowing stream, 
Or when the morning holds him in her armes. 
So lookes my Lordly loue, faire tamburlaine: 
His talke much sweeterthan the Muses song, 
They sung for honor gainst Pierides. 
Or when Minerua did with Neptune striue, 
And higher would I rearemy estimate, 
Than Iuno sister to the highest God. 
If I were matcht with mightie tamburlaine. 

Yet be not so inconstantin your loue, 
But let the yong Arabian liue in hope, 
After your rescue to eioy his choise. 
You see though first the King of Persea 
(Being a Shepheard) seem’d to loue you much, 
Now in his maiesty he leaues those lookes, 
Those words of fauour, and those comfortings, 
And giues no more than common courtesies. 

Thence rise the tears that so distain my cheeks, 
Fearing his loue through my vnworthynesse. 

Tamburlaine goes to her, & takes her away louing­
ly by the hand, looking wrathfully on Agidas, 
and sayes nothing. 

Betraide by fortune and suspitious loue. 
Threatned with frowning wrath and iealousie. 
Surpriz dwith feare of hideous reuenge. 
I stand agast: but most astonied 
To see his choller shut in secrete thoughtes, 
And wrapt insilence ofhis angry soule. 
Upon his browes was pourtraid vgly death, 
And in his eies the furieof his hart. 
That shine as Comets, menacing reuenge, 
And casts a pale complexion on his cheeks. 
As when the Sea=man sees the Hyades 
Gather an armye ofCemerian clouds, 
(Auster and Aquilon with winged Steads 
All sweating, tilt about the watery heauens, 
With shiueringspeares enforcing thunderclaps. 
And from their shieldes strike flames oflightening) 
All fearefull foldes his sailes, and sounds themaine, 
Lifting his prayers to the heauens for aid, 
Against the terrour of the winds and waues. 
So fares Agydas for the late felt frownes 
That sent a tempest to my daunted thoughtes, 
And makes my soule deuine her ouerthrow.
 
Enter Techelles with a naked dagger. 

See you Agidas how the King salutes you. 
He bids you prophesie what it imports. 

Exit. 

I prophecied before and now I prooue, 
The killing frownesof iealousie and loue. 
He needed not with words confirme my feare, 
For words are vaine where working tooles present 
The naked action of my threatned end. 
It saies, Agydas, thou shalt surely die. 
And of extremities elect the least, 
More honor and lessepaine it may procure, 
To dy by this resolued hand of thine, 
Than staythe torments he and heauen haue sworne. 
Then haste Agydas, and preuentthe plagues: 
Which thy prolonged Fates maydraw on thee: 
Go wander free from feare of Tyrants rage. 
Remooued from the Torments and the hell: 
Wherewith he may excruciate thy soule. 
And let Agidas by Agidas die. 
And with this stab slumber eternally. 

Vsumeasane, see how right the man 
Hath hitthe meaning of my Lord the King. 

Faith, and techelles, it was manly done: 
And since hewas so wise and honorable, 
Letvs affoord him now thebearing hence. 
And craue his triple worthy buriall. 

Agreed Casane, we wil honor him. 

Act. 3. Scæna. 3, 
Tamburlain, Techelles, Vsumeasane, Theridamas, 
Bassoe, Zenocrate, with others. 

BAssoe, by this thy Lord and maister knowes, 
I meane to meet him in Bithynia: 
see how hecomes? Tush. Turkes are ful of brags 
And menace more than they can wel performe: 
He meet me in the field and fetch thee hence? 
Alas (poore Turke) his fortune is to weake, 
T’incounter with the strength of Tamburlaine. 
Uiew well my Camp, and speake indifferently, 
Doo not my captaines and my souldiers looke 
As if they meant to conquer Affrica. 

Your men are valiant but their number few, 
And cannot terrefie his mightie hoste, 
My Lord, the great Commander of the worlde, 
Besides fifteene contributorie kings, 
Hath now in armes ten thousand Ianisaries, 
Mounted on lusty Mauritanian Steeds. 
Brought to the war by men of Tripoly. 
Two hundred thousand footmen that haueseru’d 
Intwo set battels foughtinGrecia: 
And for the expedition of this war, 
If he think good, can from his garrisons, 
Withdraw as many more to follow him. 

The more he brings, the greater is thespoile, 
For when they perish by our warlikehands, 
We meane to seate our footmen on their Steeds. 
And rifle all those stately Ianisars. 

But wil those Kings accompany your Lord?

Such as his Highnesse please, but some must 
To rule the prouinces he late subdude. (stay 

the fight couragiously, their crowns are yours 
This hand shal set them on your conquering heads: 
That made me Emperour of Asia. 

Let him bring millions infinite of men, 
Unpeopling Westerne Affrica and Greece: 
Yet we assure vs of thevictorie. 

Euen he that in a trice vanquisht two kings, 
More mighty than the Turkish Emperour: 
Shall rouse him out ofEurope, and pursue 
His scattered armie tilthey yeeldor die. 

Wel said theridamas, speake in that mood, 
For Wiland Shall best fitteth Tamburlain, 
Whose smilingstars giues himassured hope 
Of martiall triumph, ere he meete his foes: 
I that am tearm’d the Scourge and Wrath of God, 
The onely feare and terrour of the world, 
Wil first subdue the Turke, and then inlarge 
Those Christian Captiues, which you keep as slaues, 
Burdening their bodieswith your heauie chaines.  
And feedingthem with thin and slenderfare, 
That naked rowe about theTerrene sea. 
And when they chance tobreath and rest a space, 
Are punisht with Bastones so grieuously, 
That they lie panting on the Gallies side. 
And striue for life at euery stroke they giue, 
These are the cruell pirates of Argeire, 
That damnedtraine, the scum of Affrica. 
Inhabited with stragling Runnagates, 
That make quick hauockof the Christianblood. 
But as I liue that towne shallcurse the time 
That Tamburlaine set foot in Affrica: 

Enter Baiazeth with his Bassoes and contri­
butorie Kinges. 

Bassoes and Ianisaries of my Guard, 
Attend vpon the person of your Lord, 
The greatest Potentate of Affrica. 

Techelles, and therest prepare your swordes 
I meane t’incounterwith that Baiazeth. 

Kings of Fesse, Moroccus and Argier, 
He cals me Baiazeth, whomyou call Lord. 
Note thepresumption of this Scythian slaue: 
I tell thee villaine, those that lead my horse 
Haue to their names tytlesof dignity, 
And dar’st thou bluntly callme Baiazeth? 

And know thou Turke, that those which 
(lead my horse, 
Shall lead thee Captiue thorow Affrica. 
And dar’st thou bluntly call me tamburlaine? 

By Mahomet, my Kinsmans sepulcher. 
And by the holy Alcaron I sweare, 
He shall be made a chast and lustlesse Eunuke, 
And in my Sarell tend my Concubines: 
And all his Captaines that thus stoutly stand, 
Shall draw the chariot of my Emperesse. 
Whom I haue brought to see their ouerthrow. 

By this my sword that conquer’d Persea, 
Thy fall shall makeme famous through the world: 
I will not tell thee how Ilehandle thee, 
But euery common souldier of my Camp 
Shall smileto see thy miserable state. 

What meanes the mighty Turkish Emperor 
To talk with one so base as tamburlaine. 

Ye Moores and valiant men of Barbary. 
How can ye suffer these indignities. 

Leaue words and let them feele your lances 
(pointes. 
Which glided through thebowels of the Greekes. 

Wel said my stout contributory kings, 
Your threefold armie and my hugie hoste, 
Shall swallow vp these base borne Perseans, 

Puissant, renowmed and mighty tamburlain, 
Why stay we thus prolonging all their liues? 

I long to see those crownes won by our swords 
That we mayraigne askings of Affrica.

What Coward wold not fight for such a prize? 

Fight all couragiously and be you kings. 
I speake it, and my words are oracles. 

Zabina, mother of three brauer boies, 
Than Hercules, that inhis infancie 
Did pash the iawes of Serpents venomous: 
Whose hands are made to gripe a warlikeLance. 
Their shoulders broad, for complet armour fit, 
Their lims more large and of a bigger size 
Than all the bratsysprong from Typhons loins: 
Who, when they come vnto their fathers age, 
Will batter Turrets with their manly fists. 
Sit here vpon this royal chaire of state, 
And on thy head weare my Emperiall crowne, 
Untill I bring this sturdy tamburlain, 
And all his Captains bound in captiue chaines. 

Such good successe happen to Baiazeth, 
T
zenocrate, the loueliest Maide aliue, 
Fairer than rockes of pearle and pretious stone, 
The onely Paragon of tamburlaine, 
Whose eies are brighter than the Lamps of heauen. 
And speech morepleasant than sweet harmony: 
That with thy lookes canst clearethe darkened Sky: 
And calme the rage of thundring Iupiter: 
Sit downe by her: adorned with my Crowne, 
As if thou wert the Empresse of the world. 
Stir not zenocrate vntill thou see 
Me martch victoriously with all my men, 
Triumphing ouer him and thesehis kings. 
Which I will bring as Uassals to thy feete. 
Til then take thou my crowne, vaunt of my worth, 
And manage words with her as we will armes. 

And may my Loue, the king of Persea 
Returne with victorie, and free from wound. 

Now shalt thou feel the force of Turkish arms, 
Which lately made all Europe quake for feare: 
I haue of Turkes, Arabians, Moores and Iewes 
Enough to couer all Bythinia, 
Let thousands die, their slaughtered Carkasses  
Shal serue for walles and bulwarkes to the rest: 
And as the heads of Hydra, so my power 
Subdued, shall stand as mighty as before: 
If they should yeeld their necks vnto the sword, 
Thy souldiers armes could not enduretostrike 
So many blowes as I haueheads for thee. 
Thou knowest not (foolish hardy Tamburlaine) 
What tis to meet me in the open field, 
That leaueno ground for thee to martch vpon. 

Our conquering swords shall marshalvs the 
We vse to march vpon the slaughtered foe: 
(way 
Trampling their bowels with our horses hooffes: 
Braue horses, bred on the white Tartarian hils:
My Campe is like to Iulius Cæsars hoste, 
That neuer fought but had the victorie: 
Nor in Pharsalia was there such hot war, 
As these my followers willingly would haue: 
Legions of Spirits fleeting inthe aire,
Direct our Bullets and our weapons pointes 
And make our strokes to wound the sencelesse lure, 
And when she sees our bloodyCollours spread. 
Then Uictorie begins to take her flight, 
Resting her selfe vpon my milk=white Tent: 
But come my Lords, to weaponslet vs fall. 
The field is ours, the Turk, his wife and all.
 
Exit, with his followers. 

Come Kingsand Bassoes let vs glutour swords 
That thirst to drinke the feble Perseans blood. 
Exit, with his followers. 

BaseConcubine, must thou be plac’d by me 
That am the Empresse of the mighty Turke? 

Disdainful Turkesse and vnreuerend Bosse, 
Call’st thou me Concubine that am betroath’d 
Unto the great and mighty tamburlaine? 

To tamburlaine thegreat Tartarian thiefe? 

Thou wiltrepent these lauish words of thine, 
When thy great Bassoe, maister and thy selfe. 
Must plead for mercie at his kingly feet, 
And sue to me to be your Aduocates. 

And sue to thee? I tellthee shamelessegirle, 
Thou shalt be Landresse to my waiting maid. 
How lik’stthou her Ebea, will she serue? 

Madame, she thinks perhaps she is too fine. 
But I shallturne her into other weedes. 
And make her daintie fingers fall to woorke. 

hearst thou Anippe, how thy drudge doth talk, 
And how my slaue, her mistresse menaceth. 
Both for their sausinesse shall be employed, 
To dresse the common souldiersmeat and drink. 
For we will scorne they should come nere our selues. 

Yet somtimes let your highnesse send for the 
To do the work my chamber maid disdaines. 
They sound the battell within, and stay 

Ye Godsand powers that gouerne Persea. 
And made my lordly Loue her worthy King: 
Now strengthen him against the Turkish Baiazeth, 
And let his foes like flockesof fearfull Roes, 
Pursude by hunters, flie his angrie lookes, 
That I maysee him issue Conquerour. 

Now Mahomet, solicit God himselfe, 
And make him raine downmurthering shot fro heauen 
To dash the Scythians braines, and strike themdead, 
That dare to manage armes with him, 
That offered iewels tothy sacred shrine.
When first he war’d against the Christians. 

To the battell againe. 

By this the Turks lie weltring in their blood 
And tamburlaine is Lord of Affrica: (sound, 

Thou art deceiu’d, I heard the Trumpets 
As when my Emperourouerthrew the Greeks: 
And led them Captiue into Affrica. 
Straight will I vse thee as thy pride deserues: 
Prepare thy selfe to liue and die my slaue. 

If Mahomet should come from heauen and 
My royall Lord is slaine or conquered. 
(sweare, 
Yet should he not perswademe otherwise. 
But that he liues and will be Conquerour.
 
Baiazeth flies, and he pursues him. 
The battell short, and they enter, 
Baiazeth is ouercome. 

Now king of Bassoes, who is Conqueror? 

Thou, by thefortune of this damnedsoile,

Where are your stout contributorie kings? 

Enter Techelles, Theridamas, Vsumeasane. 

We haue their crownes their bodies strowe (thefielde. 

Each man a crown? why kingly fought ifaith 
Deliuer them into my treasurie. 

Now let me offer to my gracious Lord. 
His royall Crowne againe, so highly won: 

Nay take the Turkish Crown from her, 

And crowne me Emperour of Affrica. 

No tamburlain, though now thou gat the best 
Thou shalt not yet be Lord of Affrica. 

Giue her the Crowne Turkesse you wer best. 

He takes it from her, and giues it Zenocrate, 

Iniurious villaines, thieues, runnagates, 
How dare you thus abuse my Maiesty? 

Here Madam, you are Empresse, she is none. 

Not now theridamas, her time ispast: 
The pillers that haue bolstered vp those tearmes, 
Are falne in clusters at my conquering feet.

Though he be prisoner, hemay be ransomed: 

Not all the world shall ransom Baiazeth. 

Ah faire zabina, we haue lost the field. 
And neuer had theTurkish Emperour 
So great a foile by any forraine foe. 
Now will the Christian miscreants be glad, 
Ringing with ioy their superstitious belles: 
And making bonfires for my ouerthrow. 
But ere I die those foule Idolaters 
Shall make me bonfires with theirfilthy bones, 
Forthough the glorie of this day be lost. 
Affrik and Greece haue garrisons enough 
To make me Soueraigne of the earth againe. 

Thosewalled garrisons wil I subdue, 
And write my selfe great Lord of Affrica: 
So from the East vnto the furthest 
West, Shall tamburlain extend his puisantarme. 
The Galles and those pilling Briggandines, 
That yeerely saile to the Uenetian gulfe, 
And houer in the straightesfor Christians wracke, 
Shall lie at anchor in the Isle Asant. 
Untill the Persean Fleete and menof war, 
Sailing along the Orientall sea, 
Haue fetcht about theIndian continent: 
Euen from Persepolis to Mexico, 
And thence vnto the straightes of Iubalter: 
Where they shall meete, and ioine their force in one. 
Keeping in aw theBay of Portingale. 
And all the Ocean by the British shore: 
And by this meanesIle win the world at last. 

Yet set a ransome on me tamburlaine. 

What, thinkst thou tamburlain esteems thy 
Ile make the kings of India ere I die, 
(gold, 
Offer their mines (to sew for peace) to me, 
And dig for treasureto appease my wrath: 
Come bind them both and one lead in the Turke. 
The Turkesse let my Loues maid lead away. 

They bind them.

Ah villaines, dare ye touch my sacred armes. 
O Mahomet, Oh sleepie Mahomet. 

O cursed Mahomet that makest vs thus 
The slaues to Scythians rude and barbarous. 

Come bring them in, & for this happy coquest 
Triumph, and solemnizea martiall feast. 

Exeunt. Finis Actus tertii. 

Actus. 4. Scæna. 1. 

Souldan of Egipt with three or four Lords, Capolin 

AWake ye men of Memphis, heare the clange 
Of Scythian trumpets, hearethe Basiliskes, 
That roaring, shake Damascus turrets downe, 
The rogue of Volga holds zenocrate, 
The Souldans daughter for his Concubine, 
And with a troope of theeues and vagabondes.  
Hath spread his collours to our highdisgrace: 
While you faint=hearted base Egyptians, 
Lie slumbering on the flowrie bankes of Nile, 
As Crocodiles that vnaffrighted rest, 
While thundring Cannons rattle on their Skins. 

Nay (mightie Souldan) did your greatnes see 
The frowning lookes of fiery Tamburlaine, 
That with his terrour and imperious eies, 
Commandes the hearts of his associates, 
It might amazeyour royall maiesty. 

Uillain. I tell thee, were that tamburlaine, 
As monstrous as Gorgon, prince of Hell, 
The Souldane would not start a foot from him. 
But speake, what power hath he? 

Mightie Lord, 
Three hundred thousand men in armour clad, 
Upon their pransing Steeds, disdainfully 
With wanton paces trampling on the ground. 
Fiue hundred thousandfootmen threatning shot, 
Shaking their swords, their speares and yron bils, 
Enuironing their Standard round, that stood 
As bristle=pointed as a thorny wood. 
Their warlike Engins and munition 
Exceed theforces of their martial men. 

Nay could their nubers counteruail the stars 
Or euer drisling drops of Aprill showers, 
Or withered leaues that Autume shaketh downe. 
Yet would the Souldane by his conquering power: 
So scatter and consume them in his rage, 
That not a man should liue to rue their fall, 
C
So might your highnesse, had you time to sort 
Your fighting men, and raise your royall hoste.  
But tamburlaine, by expedition 
Aduantage takes of your vnreadinesse. 

Let him take all th’aduantages he can, 
Were all the world conspird to fight for him, 
Nay, were he Deuill, ashe is no man, 
Yet in reuenge of faire Zenocrate, 
Whom he detaineth in despight of vs, 
This arme should send himdowne to Erebus. 
Toshroud his shame in darknes of the night. 

Pleaseth your mightinesse to vnderstand, 
His resolution far exceedeth all: 
The first day when he pitcheth downe his tentes, 
White is their hew, and on his siluer crest 
A snowy Feather spangled white he beares, 
To signify the mildnesse of his minde. 
That satiate withspoile refuseth blood: 
But when Aurora mounts the second time, 
As red as scarlet is his furniture, 
Then must his kindled wrath bee quencht with blood. 
Not sparing any that can manage armes: 
But if these threats mooue not submission. 
Black are his collours, blacke Pauilion, 
His speare, his shield, his horse, his armour, plumes, 
And Ietty Feathers menace death and hell, 
Without respect of Sex, degree orage. 
He raceth all his foes with fire and sword. 

Mercilesse villaine, Pesant ignorant, 
Of lawfull armes, ormartiall discipline: 
Pillage and murderare his vsuall trades. 
The slaue vsurps the glorious name of war. 
See Capolin the faire Arabian king, 
That hath bene disapointed by this slaue: 
Of my faire daughter, and his princely Loue: 
May haue fresh warning to go war with vs, 
And be reueng’d for her dispardgement. 

Actus. 4. Scæna. 2.
 
Tamburlain, Techelles, Theridamas, Vsumeasane, 
Zenocrate, Anippe, two Moores drawing Baia­
zeth in his cage, and his wife following him. 

BRing out my foot=stoole. 

They take him out of the cage. 

Ye holy Priests of heauenly Mahomet, 
That sacrificing slice and cut your flesh, 
Staining his Altars withyour purple blood: 
Make heauen to frowne and euery fired starre 
To sucke vp poison from the moorish Fens, 
And poure it in this glorious Tyrants throat. 

The chiefest God first moouer of that Spheare, 
Enchac’d with thousands euer shining lamps, 
Will sooner burne the glorious frame of Heauen. 
Then it should so conspire my ouerthrow. 
But Uillaine, thou that wishest this tome, 
Fall prostrate on the lowe disdainefull earth. 
And be the foot=stoole of great Tamburlain, 
That I may rise into my royall throne. 

First shalt thou rip my bowels withthy sword, 
And sacrifice my heartto death and hell, 
Before I yeeld to such a slauery. 

Base villain, vassall, slaue to Tamburlaine: 
Unworthy to imbrace or touch theground. 
That beares the honor of my royall waight.  
Stoop villaine, stoope, stoope for so he bids, 
That may command thee peecemealeto be torne, 
Or scattered like the lofty Cedar trees, 
Strocke withthe voice of thundring Iupiter. 

Then as I look downe to the damned Feends. 
Feends looke on me, and thou dread God ofhell. 
With Eban Scepter strike this hatefull earth, 
And make it swallow both of vs at once. 

He gets vp vpon him to his chaire. 

Now cleare the triple region of theaire, 
And let the maiestie of heauen beholde 
TheirScourge and Terrour treade on Emperours, 
Smile Stars that raign’dat my natiuity: 
And dim the brightnesse of their neighbor Lamps, 
Disdaine to borrow light of Cynthia, 
For I thechiefest Lamp of all the earth, 
First rising inthe East with mildeaspect, 
Butfired now in the Meridian line, 
Will send vp fire toyour turningSpheares, 
And cause the Sun to borrowe light of you. 
My sword stroke fire from his coat of steele, 
Euen in Bythinia, when I took this Turke: 
As when a fiery exhalation 
Wrapt in the bowels of a freezingcloude, 
Fighting for passage, make the Welkincracke, 
And casts a flashof lightning tothe earth. 
But ereI martch towealthy Persea, 
Or leaue Damascus and th’Egyptian fields, 
As was the fame of Clymeus brain=sicke sonne, 
That almost brentthe Axeltree of heauen, 
So shall our swords, our lances and our shot. 
Fill all the aire with fiery meteors. 
Then when the Sky shal waxe as red as blood, 
It shall be said, I madeit red my selfe, 
To make me think of nought but blood and war. 

Unworthy king, that by thy crueltie, 
Unlawfully vsurpest the Persean seat: 
Dar’st thouthat neuer saw an Emperour, 
Before thou met my husband in the field, 
Being thy Captiue, thus abuse his state, 
Keeping his kinglybody in a Cage, 
That rooffes of golde, and sun=bright Pallaces, 
Should haue prepar’d to entertaine his Grace? 
And treadinghim beneath thy loathsome feet,
Whose feet thekings of Affrica haue kist. 

You must deuise some tormet worsse, my Lord 
To make these captiues reine their lauish tongues. 

zenocrate, looke better to your slaue:

She is my Handmaids slaue, and she shal looke 
That these abuses flow not from her tongue: Chide her Anippe. 

Let these be warnings for you then my slaue, 
How you abuse the person of the king: 
Or els I sweare to haue you whipt stark nak’d. 

Great tamburlaine, great in my ouerthrow, 
Ambitious pride shall make thee fall as low. 
Fortreading on the back of Baiazeth, 
That should be horsed on fower mightie kings. 

Thy names and tytles, and thy dignities 
Are fled from Baiazeth, and remaine with me, 
That will maintaine it againsta world ofKings. 
Put him in againe. 

Is this a place for mighty Baiazeth? 
Confusion light on him that helps thee thus.

There whiles he liues, shal Baiezeth bekept, 
And where I goe be thus in triumph drawne: 
And thou his wife shalt feed him with the scraps 
My seruitures shall bring the from my boord. 
For he that giues him other food than this: 
Shall sit by him and starue to death himselfe. 
This is my minde, and I will haue it so. 
Not all the Kings and Emperours ofthe Earth: 
If they would lay their crownes before my feet, 
Shall ransome him, or take him from his cage. 
The ages that shall talk of Tamburlain, 
Euen from this day to Platoes wondrousyeare, 
Shall talke how I haue handled Baiazeth. 
These Mores that drew himfrom Bythinia, 
To faire Damascus, where we now remaine, 
Shall lead him with vs wheresoere we goe. 
Techelles, and my louingfollowers, 
Now may we see Damascus lofty towers, 
Like to the shadowes of Pyramides, 
That with their beauties grac’d the Memphion fields: 
The golden stature of their feathered bird 
That spreads her wings vpon the citie wals, 
Shall not defendit from our battering shot. 
The townes=men maske in silke and cloath of gold. 
And euery house is as a treasurie. 
The men, the treasure, and the towne is ours. 

Your tentes of white now pitch’d before the 
And gentle flags of amitie displaid. (gates 
I doubt not but the Gouernour willyeeld, 
Offering Damascus to your Maiesty. 

So shall he haue his life, and all the rest. 
But if he stay vntil the bloody flag 
Be once aduanc’d on my vermilion Tent, 
He dies, and those that keptvs out so long. 
And when they see me march in black aray, 
With mournfull streamers hanging down their heads, 
Were in that citie all the world contain’d. 
Not one should scape: but perish by our swords. 

Yet would you haue some pitie for my sake, 
Because it is my countries, and my Fathers. 

Not for the world Zenocrate, if I haue sworn: 
Come bring in the Turke.

Exeunt. 

Act. 4. Scæna. 3, 

Souldane, Arabia, Capoline, with steaming collors
and Souldiers. 

ME thinks we martch as Meliager did, 
Enuironed with braue Argolian knightes: 
To chace the sauage Caldonian Boare, 
Or Cephalus with lustie Thebane youths. 
Against theWoolfe that angrie Themis sent. 
To waste and spoile the sweet Aonian fieldes. 
A monster of fiue hundred thousand heades, 
Compact of Rapine, Pyracie, and spoile. 
The Scum of men, the hate and Scourge ofGod, 
Raues in Egyptia, and annoyeth vs. 
My Lord it is the bloody Tamburlaine. 
A sturdy Felon and a base=bred Thiefe. 
By murder raised to the Persean Crowne. 
That dares controll vs in our Territories. 
To tame the pride of this presumotuous Beast, 
Ioine your Arabians with the Souldans power: 
Let vs vniteour royall bandes in one, 
And hasten to remooue Damascus siege. 
It is a blemish to the Maiestie 
And high estateof mightieEmperours, 
That such a base vsurpingvagabond 
Should braue a king, or weare a princely crowne. 

Renowmed Souldane, haue ye lately heard 
The ouerthrow of mightie Baiazeth, 
About the confines of Bythinia? 
The slaueriewherewith he persecutes 
The noble Turke and his great Emperesse. 

I haue, and sorrow for his bad successe: 
But noble Lord of great Arabia, 
Be so perswaded, that the Souldan is 
No more dismaide withtidings of his fall, 
Than in the hauen when the Pilot stands 
And viewes a strangers shiprentinthe winds, 
And shiuered againsta craggie rocke, 
Yet in compassion ofhis wretched state, 
A sacred vow toheauen and him I make, 
Confirming it with lbis holy name, 
That Tamburlaine shall rue the day, the hower, 
Wherein he wrought such ignominious wrong. 
Unto the hallowed person of a prince, 
Or kept the faire zenocrate so long. 
As Concubine, I feare to feed his lust. 

Let griefe and furie hasten on reuenge, 
Let Tamburlaine for his offences feele 
Such plagues as heauen and we can poureon him. 
I long to breake my speare vpon his crest, 
And prooue the waight of his victorious arme: 
For Fame I feare hath bene too prodigall: 
In sounding through the world his partiall praise: 

Capolin, hast thou suruaid our powers. 

Great Emperours of Egypt and Arabia. 
The number of your hostes vnited is, 
A hundred and fifty thousand horse, 
Two hundred thousand foot, braue menat armes, 
Couragious and full of hardinesse: 
As frolike as the hunters in the chace: 
Of sauage beastes amid thedesart woods. 

My mindpresageth fortunate successe, 
And tamburlaine, my spirit doth foresee 
The vtter ruine of thy men and thee. 

Then reare your standardes, let your soun­
(ding Drummes 
Direct our Souldiers to Damascus walles. 
Now Tamburlaine, the mightieSouldane comes, 
And leads with himthe great Arabian King. 
To dim thy basenesse and obscurity. 
Famous for nothing but for theftand spoile, 
To race and scatter thy inglorious crue, 
Of Scythians and slauish Persians. 

Exeunt. 

Actus: 4. Scæna 5. 

The Banquet, and to it commeth Tamburlain al in 
scarlet, Theridamas. Techelles, Vsumeasane, the 
Turke, with others. 

NOw hang our bloody collours by Damascus. 
Reflexing hewes of blood vpon their heads. 
While they walke quiuering on their citie walles, 
Halfe dead for feare before they feele my wrath: 
Then let vs freely banquet and carouse 
Fullbowles of wine vnto the God of war, 
That meanes to fill your helmets full of golde: 
And make Damascus spoiles as rich to you, 
As was to Iason Colchos golden fleece. 
And now Baiazeth, hast thou any stomacke? 

I, such a stomacke(cruel tamburlane) as I 
Willingly feed vpon thy blood=raw hart. (could 

Nay, thine owne is easier to come by, plucke 
(out that, 
And twil serue thee and thy wife: Wel zenocrate, 
techelles, and the rest, fall to your victuals. 

Fall to, and neuer may your meatdigest. 
Ye Furies that can maske inuisible, 
Diue to the bottome of Auernas poole, 
And in your hands bring hellish poison vp.
And squease it in the cup of tamburlain. 
Or winged snakes of Lerna cast your stings, 
And leaue your venoms in this Tyrants dish. 

And may this banquet prooue as omenous, 
As Prognes to th’adulterous Thracian King. 
That fed vpon the substance of his child. 

My Lord, how can you suffer these outragious 
By these slaues of yours? (curses 

To let them see (diuine zenocrate) 
I glorie in thecurses of my foes. 
Hauing thepower fro the Emperiall heauen, 
To turne them al vpon their proper heades. 

I prayyou giue them leaue Madam, this 
speech is a goodly refreshing to them. 

But if his highnesse wouldlet them be fed, it  
would doe them more good.  

Sirra, why fall you not too, are you so daintily  
brought vp, you cannot eat your owne flesh?  

First legions of deuils shall teare thee in peeces.  

Uillain, knowest thou to whom thou speakest  

O let him alone: here, eat sir, take it frommy  
swords point, or Ile thrust it to thy heart.  

He takes it and stamps vpon it.  

He stamps it vnder his feet my Lord.  

Take it vp Uillaine and eat it, or I wil lmake  
thee slice the brawnes of thy armes into carbonadoes,  
and eat them.  

Nay, twere better he kild his wife, & then she shall  
be sure not to be staru’d, & hebe prouided for a moneths  
victuall before hand. 

Here is my dagger, dispatch her while she is  
fat, for if she liue but a while longer, shee will fall into a  
comsumption with freatting, and then she will not bee  
woorth the eating.  

Doost thou think that Mahomet wil suffer this  

Tis like hewil, when he cannot let it.  

Go to, fal to your meat: what not a bit? belike he  
hath not benewatered to day, giue him some drinke. 
 
They giue him water to drinke, and he flings it on  
the ground.  

Faste and welcome sir, while hunger make you eat.  
How now zenocrate, dooth not theTurke and his wife  
make a goodly showe at a banquet?  

Yes. my Lord.  

Me thinks, tis a great deale better than a con=  
sort ofmusicke. 

Yet musicke woulde doe well to cheere vp ze­
nocrate: pray thee tel, why art thou so sad? 
If thou wilt haue a song, the Turke shall straine his voice: but why 
is it? 

My lord, to see my fathers towne besieg’d, 
The countrie wasted where my selfe was borne, 
How can it but afflict my verie soule? 
If any loue remaine in you my Lord, 
Or if my loue vnto your maiesty 
May merit fauour at your highnesse handes, 
Then raise your siege from faire Damascus walles, 
And with my father take a frindly truce. 

Zenocrate, wereEgypt Ioues owne land, 
Yet would I with my sword make Ioue to stoope, 
I will confute those blind Geographers 
That make a triple region inthe world, 
Excluding Regions which I meane to trace, 
And with this pen reduce themto a Map. 
Calling the Prouinces, Citties and townes 
After my name and thine zenocrate: 
Here at Damascus will I make the Point 
That shall begin the Perpendicular. 
And wouldst thou haue me buythy Fathers loue 
With such a losse? Tell me zenocrate? 

Honor still waight on happy tamburlaine: 
Yet giue me leaue to plead for himmy Lord. 

Content thy selfe, his person shall be safe. 
And allthe friendes of faire Zenocrate, 
If with their liues theywillbe pleasde to yeeld, 
Or may be forc’d to makeme Emperour. 
For Egypt and Arabia must be mine.  
Feed you slaue, thou maist thinke thy selfe happietobe 
fed from my trencher. 

My empty stomacke ful of idle heat, 
Drawes bloody humours from my feeble partes, 
Preseruing life, by hasting cruell death.
My vaines are pale, my sinowes hard and drie, 
My iointes benumb’d, vnlesse I eat, I die. 

Eat Baiazeth, Letvs liue in spite of them, 
Looking some happiepower will pitie and inlarge vs. 

Here Turk, wilt thou hauea cleane trencher? 

I Tyrant, and moremeat. 

Soft sir, you must bedieted, too much eating 
will make you surfeit. 

So it would my lord, specially hauingso smal 
a walke, and so litle exercise. 

Enter a second course of Crownes.

Theridamas, techelles and Casane, here are 
the cates you desire to finger, are they not? 

I (my Lord) but nonesaue kinges must feede with these. 

Tis enough for vs to see them, and for tam­
burlaine onely to enioy them. 

Wel, Here isnow to the Souldane of Egypt 
the King of Arabia, and the Gouernout of Damascus. 
Now take these three crownes, and pledgeme, my con= 
tributorie Kings. I crowne you here(Theridamas) King of Argier: 
Techelles King of Fesse, and Vsumeasane King of 
Morocus. How say you to this (Turke) these are not 
your contributorie kings. 

Nor shall they long be thine, I warrant them. 

Kings of Argier, Morocus, and of Fesse. 
You that haue martcht with happy Tamburlaine, 
As far as from the frozen place of heauen. 
Unto the watry mornings ruddy hower. 
And thence by land vnto the Torrid Zone, 
Deserue these tytles I endow you with. 
By value and by magnanimity. 
Your byrthes shall be no blemish to your fame. 
For vertue is the fount whence honor springs. 
And they are worthy she inuesteth kings. 

And since your highnesse hath so well vouchsaft, 
If we deserue them not with higher meeds 
Then erst our states and actions haue retain’d, 
Take them away againe and make vs slaues. 

Wel said Theridamas, when holy Fates 
Shall stablish mein strong Egyptia. 
We meane to traueile to th’Antatique Pole, 
Conquering the people vnderneath our feet.
And be renowm’d, asneuer Emperours were. 
zenocrate, I will not crowne thee yet, 
Until with greater honors I be grac’d. 

Finis Actus quarti. 

Actus: 5. Scæna. 1. 

The Gouernour of Damasco, with three or foure 
Citizens, and foure Virgins with branches 
of Laurell in their hands. 
 
STil dooth this man or ratherGod of war, 
Batter our walles, and beat our Turrets downe 
And to resist with longer stubbornesse,
Or hope of rescue from the SouldansSoldan’s power, 
Were but to bring our wilfull ouerthrow, 
And make vs desperate of our threatned liues: 
We see his tents haue now bene altered, 
With terrours to the last and cruelsthew: 
His cole=blacke collours euery whereaduaunst, 
Threaten our citie with a generall spoile: 
And if we should with common rites ofArmes, 
Offer our safeties to his clemencie, 
I fearethe custome proper to his sword, 
Which he obserues as parcell of his fame: 
Intending so to terrifie theworld, 
By any innouation or remorse, 
Will neuer bedispenc’dwith til our deaths, 
Therfore, for these our harmlesse virgines sakes, 
Whose honors and whoseliues relie on him: 
Let vs haue hope that their vnspotted praiers 
Their blubbered cheekes and hartie humble mones 
Will melt his furie into some remorse: 
And vse vs like a louingConquerour. 

If humble suites or imprecations, 
(vttered with teares of wretchednesse and blood, 
Shead from the heads and hearts of all our Sex. 
Some madeyour wiues, and some your children) 
Might haue intreatedyour obdurate breasts. 
To entertaine some care of our securities. 
Whiles only danger beat vpon our walles, 
These more than dangerous warrants of our death 
Had neuer bene erected as they bee, 
Nor you depend on such weake helps as we 

Wel, louely Uirgins, think our countries care 
Our loue of honor loth to be enthral’d 
To forraine powers, and rough imperious yokes: 
Would not with too much cowardize or feare, 
Before all hope of rescue were denied, 
Submit your selues and vs toseruitude. 
Therefore in that your safeties and our owne 
Your honors, liberties and liues were weigh’d 
Inequall care and ballance with our owne, 
Endure as we the malice of our stars. 
The wrath of Tamburlain, and power of warres. 
Or be the means the ouerweighingheauens 
Haue kept to quallifie these hot extreames. 
And bring vs pardon in your chearfull lookes. 

Then here before the maiesty of heauen, 
And holy Patrones of Egyptia, 
With knees and hearts submissiuewe intreate,
Grace to our words and pitie toour lookes 
That this deuise mayprooue propitious, 
And through the eies and eares of tamburlaine, 
Conuey euents of mercie to his heart: 
Graunt that these signes of victorie we yeeld 
May bind the temples of his conquering head, 
To hidethe folded furrowes of his browes, 
And shadow his displeased countenance, 
With happy looks of ruthe and lenity, 
Leaue vs my Lord, and louing countrimen, 
What simple Uirgins mayperswade, we will. 

Farewell (sweet Uirgins) on whose safe return 
Depends our citie, libertie, and liues. 

Exeunt. 
 
Actus. 5. Scæna. 2. 

Tamburlaine. Techelles Theridamas, Vsumeasan, 
with others: Tamburlaine all in blacke, and verie 
melancholy. 

WHat, are the Turtles fraide out of their (neastes? 
Alas poore fooles, must you be first shalfeele 
The sworne destruction of Damascus. 
They know my custome: could theynot as well 
Haue sent ye out, when firstmy milkwhite flags 
Through which sweet mercie threw her gentle beams 
Reflexing them on your disdainfull eies: 
As now when furie and incensed hate 
Flings slaughtering terrour from my coleblack tents. 
And tels for trueth, submissions comes too late. 

Most happy King and Emperour of the 
(earth. 
Image of Honor and Nobilitie. 
For whome the Powers diuine haue made the world. 
And on whose throne the holy Graces sit. 
Inwhose sweete person is compriz’d the Sum 
Of naturesSkill and heauenly maiestie. 
Pittie our plightes, O pitie poore Damascus: 
Pitie olde age, within whose siluer haires 
Honor and reuerence euermore haue raign’d, 
Pitie the mariagebed, where many a Lord 
In prime and glorie of his louing ioy. 
Embraceth now with teares of ruth and blood, 
The iealous bodie of his fearfull wife, 
Whose cheekes and hearts so punisht withconceit,  
To thinke thy puisant neuer staied arme 
Will part their bodies, and preuenttheir soules 
From heauens of comfort, yet their age might beare, 
Now waxe all pale and withered to the death, 
As well for griefeour ruthlesse Gouernour 
Haue thus refusde the mercie ofthy hand, 
(Whose scepter Angels kisse, and Furiesdread) 
As for their liberties, their loues orliues, 
O then for these, and such as we our selues, 
For vs, for infants, and for allour bloods, 
That neuer nourisht thought against thy rule, 
Pitie, O pitie, (sacred Emperour) 
The prostrate seruice of this wretched towne. 
And take in signe thereof this gilded wreath, 
Whereto ech man of rule hath giuen his hand,
And wisht asworthy subiects happy meanes, 
To be inuesters of thy royall browes, 
Euen with the true Egyptian Diadem. 

Uirgins, in vaine ye labour to preuent 
That which minehonor sweares shal be perform’d: 
Behold my sword, what see you atthe point? 

Nothing but feare and fatall steelemy Lord. 

Your fearfull minds are thicke and mistie then 
For there sits Death, there sits imperious Death. 
Keeping his circuitby the slicing edge. 
But I’am pleasde you shall not see him there, 
He now is seated on my horsmens speares: 
And on their points his fleshlesse bodie feedes. 
Techelles, straight goe charge a few of them 
To chardge these Dames, and shew my seruant death: 
Sitting in scarlet on their armed speares. 

O pitie vs. 

Away with them I say and shew them death.

They take them away. 

I will not spare theseproud Egyptians. 
Nor change my Martiallobseruations, 
For all the wealth of Gehons golden waues. 
Or for the loue of Venus, would she leaue 
The angrie God of Armes, and liewith me. 
They haue refusde the offer of theirliues, 
And know my customes are as peremptory 
As wrathfull Planets, death, or destinie. 

Enter Techelles. 

What, haue your horsmen shewen thevirgins Death?

They hauemy Lord, and on Damascus wals 
Haue hoistedvp their slaughtered carcases. 

A sight as banefull to their soules I think 
As are Thessalian drugs or Mithradate.
But goe my Lords, put the rest to the sword. 

Exeunt.

Ah faire Zenocrate, diuine Zenocrate, 
Faireis too foule an Epithite for thee, 
That in thy passion for thy countries loue, 
And feare to see thy kingly Fathers harme, 
With haire discheweld wip’st thy watery cheeks: 
And like to Flora in her mornings pride, 
Shaking her siluer treshes in the aire. 
Rain’st on the earth resolued pearle in showers, 
And sprinklest Saphyrs on thy shining face, 
Wher Beauty, mother to the Muses sits, 
And comments vollumes with her Yuory pen: 
Taking instructions from thy flowing eies, 
Eies when that Ebena steps to heauen. 
In silence of thy solemn Euenings walk. 
Making the mantle of the richest night. 
The Moone, the Planets, and the Meteors light, 
There Angels in their christal armours fight
A doubtfull battellwith my temptedthoughtes, 
For Egypts freedom and the Souldans life: 
His life that so consumes Zenocrate, 
Whose sorrowes laymoresiege vnto my soule, 
Than all my Army to Damascus walles. 
And neither Perseans Soueraign, nor the Turk 
Troubled my sences withconceit of foile, 
So much by much, as dooth zenocrate. 
What is beauty saith my sufferings then? 
If all the pens that euer poets held, 
Had fed thefeeling oftheir maisters thoughts, 
And euery sweetnes that inspir’d their harts, 
Their minds, and muses on admyred theames: 
If all the heauenly Quintessence they still 
From their immortall flowers of Poesy, 
Wherein as in a myrrour we perceiue 
The highest reaches of a humaine wit. 
If these had made onePoems period 
And all combin’d in Beauties worthinesse, 
Yet should ther houer in their restlesse heads, 
One thought, one grace, one woonder at the least, 
Which into words no vertue can digest: 
But how vnseemly is it for my Sex 
My discipline of armes and Chiualrie, 
My nature and theterrour of my name. 
To harbour thoughts effeminate and faint? 
Saue onely that in Beauties iust applause, 
With whose instinct the soule of man istoucht. 
And euery warriour that is rapt with loue, 
Of fame, of valour, and of victory  
Must needs haue beauty beat on his conceites, 
I thus conceiuing and subduing both: 
That which hath stopt thetempestof the Gods, 
Euen from the fiery spangledvaile of heauen, 
To feele the louely warmth ofshepheards flames, 
And martch in cottages of strowed weeds, 
Shal giue the world to note for allmy byrth, 
That Uertue solely is the sum of glorie,
And fashions men with true nobility. 
Who’s within there? 

Enter two or three. 

Hath Baiazeth benefed to day? 

I, my Lord. 

Bring him forth, & let vs know if the towne 
be ransackt. 

Enter Techelles, Theridamas, Vsumeasan & others. 

The town is ours my Lord, and fresh supply 
Of conquest, and ofspoile is offered vs: 

Thats wel techelles, what’s the newes? 

The Souldan and the Arabian king together 
Martchon vs withsuch eager violence, 
As if there were no way but one with vs.

No more there is not I warrant thee techelles 

They bring in the Turke. 

We know thevictorie is ours my Lord, 
But let vs saue the reuerend Souldans life, 
Forfaire Zenocrate, that so laments his state. 

That will we chiefly see vnto, theridamas. 
Forsweet zenocrate, whose worthinesse 
Deserues a conquest ouer euery hart: 
And now my footstoole, if I loose the field, 
You hope of libertie and restitution: 
Here let him stay my maysters from the tents, 
Till we haue madevs ready for the field. 
Pray for vs Baiazeth, we aregoing. 

Exeunt.

Go, neuer to returne with victorie: 
Millions of men encompasse thee about. 
And gore thy body withas many wounds,
Sharpeforked arrowes light vpon thy horse: 
Furies from the blacke Cocitus lake, 
Breake vp the earth, and with their firebrands, 
Enforce thee run vpon thebanefull pikes. 
Uolleyes of shot pierce through thy charmed Skin. 
And euery bullet dipt in poisoned drugs, 
Or roaring Cannons seuer all thy ioints.
Making thee mount as highas Eagles soare. 

Let all the swords and Lances in the field, 
Stick in his breast, as in their proper roomes, 
At euery pore let blood commedropping foorth. 
That lingring paines may massacre his heart. 
And madnesse send his damned soule tohell. 

Ah faire zabina, we may curse his power, 
The heauens may frowne, the earth for anger quake, 
But such a Star hath influence in his sword, 
As rules the Skies, and countermands the Gods. 
More than Cymerian Stix or Distinie: 
And then shall we in this detested guyse, 
With shame, with hungar,and with horror aie 
Griping our bowels with retorqued thoughtes, 
And haue no hope to end our extasies. 

Then is there left no Mahomet, no God, 
No Feend, no Fortune, nor no hopeof end?  
To our infamous monstrous slaueries: 
Gape earth, and let theFeends infernall view, 
As hell, as hoplesse and asfull of feare 
As are the blasted banks of Erebus: 
Where shaking ghosts with euer howling grones, 
Houer about the vgly Ferriman, to get a passage to E­
why should we liue, O wretches, beggars slaues (lisiã 
Why liue we Baiazeth, and buildvp neasts, 
So high within the region of theaire, 
By liuing long in this oppression, 
That all the world will see and laugh to scorne. 
The former triumphes of our mightines, 
In this obscure infernall seruitude? 

O life more loathsome to my vexed thoughts, 
Than noisome parbreak of the Stygian Snakes, 
Which fils the nookes of Hell with standing aire, 
Infecting all the Ghosts with curelesse griefs: 
O dreary Engines ofmy loathed sight, 
That sees my crowne, my honor and my name, 
Thrust vnder yoke and thraldom of a thiefe. 
Why feed ye still on daies accursed beams, 
And sink not quite into my tortur’d soule. 
You see my wife, my Queene and Emperesse, 
Brought vp and propped by the hand of fame, 
Queen of fifteene contributoryQueens, 
Now throwen to roomes of blacke abiection, 
Smear’d with blots of basest drudgery: 
And Uillanesse to shame, disdaine, and misery: 
Accursed Baiazeth, whose words of ruth, 
That would with pity chear zabinas heart: 
And make our soules resolue in ceasles teares, 
Sharp hunger bites vpon and gripes theroot: 
From whencethe issues of my thoughts doe breake, 
O poore zabina, O my Queen, my Queen, 
Fetch me some water for my burning breast, 
To cooleand comfort me with longer date, 
That int he shortned sequel ofmy life, 
I may poure foorth my soule into thine armes, 
With words of loue: whose moaning entercourse 
Hath hethertobin staid, with wrath and hate 
Of our expreslesse band inflictions inflictions: 

Sweet Baiazeth, I will prolong thy life, 
As longas any blood or sparke of breath 
Can quench or coole the torments of my griefe. 

She goes out: 

Now Baiazeth, abridgethy banefull daies, 
And beat thy braines out ofthy conquer’d head: 
Since other meanes are all forbidden me, 
That may be ministers of my decay. 
O highest Lamp of euerliuing Ioue, 
Accursed day infected with my griefs, 
Hide now thy stained face in endles night, 
And shut the windowes of the light some heauens, 
Let vgly darknesse with her rusty coach 
Engyrt withtempests wrapt inpitchy clouds, 
Smother the earth withneuer fading mistes: 
And let her horsesfrom their nostrels breathe 
Rebellious winds and dreadfull thunder claps: 
That in this terrour tamburlaine may liue. 
And my pin’d soule resolu’d in liquid ay, 
May styl excruciat his tormented thoughts. 
Then let the stony dart of sencelesse colde,
Pierce through thecenter of my withered heart, 
And make a passage for my loathed life. 

He brains himself against the cage. 
 
Enter Zabina. 

What do mine eies behold, my husband dead? 
His Skul al riuin in twain, his brainesdasht out? 
The brainesof Baiazeth, my Lordand Soueraigne? 
O Baiazeth, my husband and my Lord, 
O Baiazet, O Turk, O Emperor, giue him his liquor 
Not I, bring milkand fire, and my blood I bring him 
againe, teare me in peeces, giue me the sworde with a
ball of wildefire vpon it. Downe withhim, downe with 
him. Goe to my child, away, away, away. Ah, saue that 
Infant, saue him, saue him. I, euen I speaketo her, the 
Sun was downe. Streamers white. Red, Blacke, here
here, here. Fling the meat in his face. Tamburlaine, 
tamburlaine, Let the souldiers be buried. Hel, death, 
tamburlain, Hell, make ready my Coch, my chaire, my 
iewels, I come, I come, I come. 

She runs against the Cage and braines her selfe 

Zenocrate wyth Anippe, 

Wretched Zenocrate, that liuest to see, 
Damascus walles di’d with Egytian blood. 
Thy Fathers subiects and thy countrimen: 
Thystreetes strowed with disseuered iointes ofmen, 
And wounded bodies gasping yet for life. 
But most accurst, to see the Sun=bright troope 
Of heauenly vyrgins and vnspotted maides,
Whose lookes might make the angry God ofarmes, 
To breake his sword, and mildly treat ofloue, 
On horsmens Lances tobe hoisted vp, 
And guiltlesly endurea cruell death. 
For euery fell and stout Tartarian Stead,  
That stampt on others withtheir thundring hooues 
When al their riders chardg’d their quiuering speares 
Began to checke theground, and rain themselues: 
Gazing vpon the beautie of their lookes: 
Ah Tamburlaine, wert thou the cause of this 
That tearm’st Zenocrate thy dearest loue? 
Whose liues were dearer to Zenocrate 
Than her owne life, or ought saue thine owneloue. 
But see another bloody spectacle. 
Ah wretched eies, the enemies of my hart, 
How are ye glutted with these grieuous obiects, 
And tell my soule mor tales of bleeding ruth? 
See, se Anippe if they breathe or no. 

No breath nor sence, nor motionin them both 
Ah Madam, this their slauery hath Enforc’d, 
And ruthlesse cruelty of Tamburlaine. 

Earth cast vp fountaines from thy entralles, 
And wet thy cheeks for their vntimely deathes: 
Shake with their waight in signe of feare & griefe: 
Blush heauen, that gaue them honor at their birth, 
And let them die a death so barbarous. 
Those that are proud of fickle Empery, 
And place their chiefest good in earthly pompe: 
Behold the Turke and his greatEmperesse. 
Ah tamburlaine, my loue, sweet tamburlaine, 
That fights for Scepters and for slippery crownes, 
Behold the Turk and his great Emperesse, 
Thou that in conduct of thy happy stars, 
Sleep’st euery night with conquest on thy browes, 
And yetwouldst shun thewauering turnes ofwar, 
In feare and feeling of the like distresse, 
Behold the Turke and his great Emperesse. 

Ah myghty Ioue and holy Mahomet, 
Pardon my Loue, oh pardonhis contempt, 
Of earthly fortune, and respect of pitie, 
And let not conquest ruthlesly pursewde 
Be equally against his lifeincenst, 
In this great Turk and haplesse Emperesse. 
And pardon me that was not moou’d with ruthe, 
To see them liue so long in misery: 
Ah what may chance to thee zenocrate?

Madam content your self and be resolu’d, 
Your Loue hath fortune so at his command, 
That she shall stay and turneher wheeleno more, 
As longas life maintaines his mighty arme, 
That fights for honor to adorne your head. 

Enter a Messenger. 

What other heauie news now brings Philemus? 

Madam, your father and th’Arabian king, 
The firstaffecter of your excellence, 
Comes now as Turnus gainst Eneas did. 
Armed with lance into the Egyptian fields, 
Ready for battaile gainst my Lordthe King.

Now shame and duty, loue and feare presents 
A thousand sorrowes to my martyred soule: 
Whom should I wish the fatall victory, 
When my poore pleasures are deuidedthus, 
And rackt by dutie from my cursedheart: 
My father and my first betrothed loue,
Must fight against my life and present loue:
Wherin the change I vse condemns my faith, 
And makes my deeds infamous through the world. 
But as the Gods to end the Troyans toile, 
Preuented Turnus of Lauinia. 
And fatally enricht Eneas loue. 
So for a finallIssue tomy griefes, 
To pacifie my countrie and my loue, 
Must Tamburlaine by their resistlesse powers, 
With vertue of a gentle victorie, 
Conclude a league of honor to my hope, 
Then as the powers deuine haue preordainde, 
With happy safty of my fathers life, 
Send like defence of faire Arabia. 

They sound to the battaile. 
And Tamburlaine enioyes the victory, after Arabia 
enters wounded. 

What cursed power guides the murthering hands, 
Of this infamous Tyrants souldiers. 
That no escape may saue their enemies: 
Nor fortune keep them selues from victory. 
Lye down Arabia, wounded to the death, 
And let Zenocrates faire eies beholde 
That as for her thoubearst these wretched armes. 
Euen so for her thoudiest in these armes: 
Leauing thy blood for witnesse ofthy loue. 

Too deare a witnesse for such loue my Lord, 
Behold Zenocrate, the cursed obiect 
Whose Fortunes neuer mastered her griefs: 
Behold her wounded inconceit for thee, 
As much asthy faire body is for me. 

Then shal I die with full contented heart, 
Hauing beheld deuine Zenocrate, 
Whose sight with ioy would take away my life, 
As now it bringeth sweetnesse to my wound,
If I had not bin wounded as I am.  
Ah that the deadly panges I suffer now, 
Would lend an howers license to my tongue: 
To make discourse of some sweet accidents 
Haue chanc’d thy merits in this worthles bondage. 
And that I might be priuy to the state, 
Of thy deseru’d contentment and thy loue: 
But making now a vertue of thy sight, 
To driue all sorrow from my fainting soule: 
Since Death denies mefurther cause of ioy. 
Depriu’d of care, my heart with comfort dies. 
Since thy desired hand shall close mine eies. 

Enter Tamburlain leading the Souldane, Techel­
les, Theridamas, Vsumeasane, with others. 

Come happy Father of Zenocrate, 
A title higher than thy Souldans name: 
Though my right hand haue thus enthralled thee 
Thyprincely daughter here shall set thee free. 
She that hath calmde the furie of my sword. 
Which had ere this bin bathde in streames of blood, 
As vast and deep as Euphrates or Nile. 

O sight thrice welcome to my ioiful soule. 
To see the kingmy Father issue safe, 
From dangerous battel of my conquering Loue. 

Wel met my onlydeare Zenocrate, 
Though with the losse of Egypt and my Crown. 

Twas I my lordthat gat the victory, 
And therfore grieue not at your ouerthrow. 
Since I shall render all into your hands. 
And ad morestrength to your dominions 
Then euer yet confirm’d th’Egyptian Crown. 
The God of war resignes his roume to me, 
Meaning to make me Generall ofthe world, 
Ioue viewing me in armes, lookes pale and wan, 
Fearing my power should pull him from his throne, 
Where ere I come the fatall sisters sweat, 
And griesly death by running to and fro, 
To doo their ceaslles homag to my sword: 
And here in Affrick where it seldom raines, 
Since I arriu’d with my triumphat hoste, 
Haue swelling cloudes drawenfrom wide gasping 
(woundes. 
Bene oft resolu’d in bloody purple showers, 
A meteor that might terrify theearth, 
And make it quake at euery drop it drinks:
Millions of soules sit on the bankes of Styx, 
Waiting the back returne of Charons boat, 
Hell and Elisian swarme with ghosts of men, 
That I haue sent from sundry foughten fields. 
To spread my fame through hell and vp toheauen: 
And see my Lord, a sight ofstrange import, 
Emperours and kings liebreathlesse at my feet, 
The Turk and his great Emperesse as it seems, 
Left to themselues while we were at the fight. 
Haue desperatly dispatcht their slauish liues: 
With them Arabia too hath left his life, 
Al sights of power to grace my victory: 
And such areobiects fit for Tamburlaine. 
Wherein as in a mirrour may be seene, 
His honor, that consists in sheading blood, 
When men presume to manage armes with him. 

Mighty hath God & Mahomet made thy hand 
(Renowmed tamburlain) to whom all kings 
Of force must yeeld their crownes and Emperies, 
And I am pleasde with this my ouerthrow: 
If as beseemes a person of thy state, 
Thou hast with honor vsde Zenocrate. 

Her state and person wants no pomp you see, 
And for all blot of foule inchastity, 
I record heauen, her heauenly selfeis cleare:
Then let me find no further time to grace 
Her princely Temples with the Persean crowne: 
But here these kings that on my fortunes wait: 
And haue bene crown’d for prooued worthynesse, 
Euen by this hand that shall establish them, 
Shal now, adioining al their hands with mine, 
Inuest her heremy Queene of Persea, 
What saith the noble Souldaneand Zenocrate? 

I yeeld with thanks and protestations 
Of endlesse honor to thee for her loue. 

Then doubt I not but faire Zenocrate 
Will soone consent to satisfy vs both. 

Els should I much forget my self, my Lord, 

Then letvs set the crowne vpon her head, 
That long hath lingred for so high a seat.

My hand is ready to performe the deed, 
For now her mariage time shall worke vs rest: 

And her’s the crown my Lord, help set it on 

Then sit thou downe diuine Zenocrate, 
And here we crownethee Queene of Persea, 
And all thekingdomes and dominions 
That late the powerof Tamburlaine subdewed: 
As Iuno, when theGiants were supprest, 
That darted mountaines ather brother Ioue: 
So lookes my Loue, shadowing in her browes 
Triumphes and Trophees for my victories:  
Or as Latonas daughter bent to armes,  
Adding more courage to my conquering mind,  
To gratify the sweet zenocrate,  
Egyptians, Moores and men of Asia,  
From Barbary vnto the Westerne Indie,  
Shall pay a yearly tribute to thy Syre.  
And from the boundes of Affrick to the banks  
Of Ganges, shall his mighty arme extend.  
And now my Lords and louing followers,  
That purchac’d kingdomes by your matiall deeds,  
Cast off your armor, put on scarlet roabes.  
Mount vp your royall places of estate,  
Enuironed with troopes of noble men,  
And there make lawes to rule your prouinces:  
Hang vp your weapons on Alcides poste,  
For Tamburlaine takes truce with al the world.  
Thy first betrothed, Loue Arabia,  
Shall we with honor (as beseemes) entombe,  
With this great Turke and his faire Emperesse:  
Then after all these solemne Exequies,  
We wil our celebrated rites of mariage solemnize.  

Finis Actus quinti & vltimi huius  
primae partis.  




