
The Famous  
TRAGEDY  
OF THE RICH IEVV  
OF MALTA.  



TO  
MY VVORTHY  
FRIEND, Mr. THOMAS  
HAMMON, OF GRAYES  
INNE, &c. 
 
THis Play, composed by so  
worthy an Authour as Mr.  
Marlo; and the part of the  
Jew presented by so vnimi­ 
table an Actor as Mr. Allin,  
being in this later Age com­ 
mended to the Stage: As I  
vsher’d it unto the Court, and  
presented it to the Cock­pit,  
with these Prologues and E­ 
pilogues here inserted, so now being newly brought to  
the Presse, I was loath it should be published without  
the ornament of an Epistle; making choyce of you  
vnto whom to deuote it; then whom (of all those  
Gentlemen and acquaintance, within the compasse of  
my long knowledge) there is none more able to taxe  
Ignorance, or attribute right to merit. Sir, you haue bin  
pleased to grace some of mine owne workes with your  
curteous patronage; I hope this will not be the worse  
accepted, because commended by mee; ouer whom,  
none can clayme more power or priuilege than your  
selfe. I had no better a New­yeares gift to present you  
with; receiue it therefore as a continuance of that in­ 
uiolable obliegement, by which, he rests stil ingaged;  
who as he euer hath, shall alwayes remaine,  

The Tuissmus:  
THO. HEYVVOOD.  

The Prologue spoken at Court. 

GRacious and Great, that we so boldly dare, 
(’Mo[·]gst other Playes that now in fashion are) 
To present this; writ many yeares agone, 
And in that Age, thought second vnto none; 
We humbly c[·]ave your pardon: we pursue 
The story of a rich and famous Jew
Who liu’d in Malta: you shall find him still, 
In all his p[·]oiects, a sound Macheuill; 
And that’s his Character: He that hath past 
So many Censures, is now come at last 
To haue your princely Eares, grace you him; then
You crowne the Action, and renowne the pen. 

Epilogue. 

IT is our feare (dread Soueraigne) we haue bin 
Too tedious; neither can’t be lesse than sinne 
To wrong your Princely patience: If we haue, 
(Thus low deiected) we your pardon craue: 
And if ought here offend your eare or sight, 
We onely Act, and Speake, what others write. 

The Prologue to the Stage, at the Cocke­pit. 

WE know not how this Play may passe this Stage, 
But by the best of * Poets in that age 
The Malta­Jew had being, and was made; 
And He, then by the best of * Actors play’d: 
In Hero and Leander, one did gaine 
A lasting memorie: in Tamberlaine, 
This Jew, with others many: th’ other man 
The Attribute of peerelesse, being a man 
Whom we may ranke with (doing no one wrong) 
Proteus for shapes, and Roseius for a tongue, 
So could he speake, so vary; nor is’t hate 
To merit: in * him who doth personate 
Our Jew this day, nor is it his ambition 
To exceed, or equall, being of condition 
More modest; this is all that he intends, 
(And that too, at the vrgence of some friends)
To proue his best, and if none here gaine­say it, 
The part he hath studied, and intends to play it. 

Epilogue. 

IN Graving, with Pigmalion to contend; 
Or Painting, with Apelles; doubtlesse the end 
Must be disgrace: our Actor did not so, 
He onely aym’d to goe, but not out goe. 
Nor thinke that this day any prize was plaid, 
Here were no betts at all, no wagers laid; 
All the ambition that his mind doth swell, 
Is but to heare from you, (by me) ’twas well. 
   
THE IEW OF MALTA. 

ALbeit the world thinke Macheuill is dead, 
Yet was his soule but flownebeyond the Alpes, 
And now the Guize is dead, is come from France 
To view this Land, and frolickewith his friends. 
To some perhaps my name is odious, 
But such as loue me, gardme from their tongues, 
And let them know that I am Macheuill, 
And weigh not men, and therefore not mens words: 
Admir’d I am of those that hate me most. 
Though some speake openly against my bookes, 
Yet will they reade me, and thereby attaine 
To Peters Chayre: And when they cast me off; 
Are poyson’d by my climing followers. 
I count Religion but a childish Toy, 
And hold there is no sinne but Ignorance. 
Birds of the Aire will tell of murders past; 
I am asham’d to heare such fooleries: 
Many will talke of Title toa Crowne. 
What right had Caesar to the Empire? 
Mightfirst made Kings, and Lawes were then most sure 
When like the Drancus they were writ in blood.
Hence comes it, that a strong built Citadell 
Commands much more then letters can import: 
Which maxime had Phaleris obseru’d, 
H’had neuer bellowed in a brasen Bull 
Of great ones enuy; o’th poore pettywites, 
Let mebe enuy’d and not pittied!
But whither am I bound, I come not, I, 
To reade a lecture herein Britaine, 
But to present the Tragedy ofa Iew, 
Who smiles tosee how full his bags arecramb’d 
Which mony was not got without my meanes. 
I craue but this, Grace himas he deserues, 
And let him not be entertain’d the worse 
Because he fauours me. 

Enter Barabas in his Counting­house, 
with heapes of gold before him. 

So that of thus much that returne was made: 
And of the third part of the Persian ships, 
There was the venture summ’d and satisfied. 
As for those Samintes, and the menof Vzz, 
That bought my Spanish Oyles, and Wines of Greece, 
Here haue I purst their paltry siluerbings. 
Fye; what a trouble tis to count this trash. 
Well fare the Arabians, who so richly pay, 
The things they traffique for with wedge of gold, 
Whereof a man may easily in a day 
Tell that which maymaintaine him all his life. 
The needy groome that neuer fingredgroat,
Would make a miracle of thus much coyne: 
But he whose steele­bard coffers are cramb’d full, 
And all his life time hath bin tired, 
Wearying his fingers ends with telling it, 
Would in his age be loath to labour so, 
And for a pound to sweat himselfe todeath: 
Giue me the Merchants of the Indian Mynes, 
That trade in mettall of the purest mould; 
The wealthy Moore, that in the Easterne rockes 
Without controule can picke his riches vp, 
And in his house heape pearle like pibble­stones: 
Receiue them free, and sell them by the weight, 
Bags of fiery Opals, Saphires, Amatists, 
Iacints, hard Topas, grasse­greene Emeraulds, 
Beauteous Rubyes, sparkling Diamonds, 
And seildsene costly stones of so great price, 
As one of them indifferently rated, 
And of a Carrect of this quantity, 
May serue in perill of calamity 
To ransome great Kings from captiuity. 
This is the ware wherein consists my wealth: 
And thus me thinkes should men of iudgement frame 
Their meanes of traffique from the vulgar trade, 
And as their wealth increaseth, so inclose 
Infinite riches ina little roome. 
But now how stands the wind? 
Into what corner peeres my Halcions bill? 
Ha, tothe East? yes: See how stands the Vanes? 
East and by­South: why thenI hopemy ships 
I sent for Egypt and theborderingIles 
Are gotten vp by Nilus winding bankes: 
Mine Argosie from Alexandria, 
Loaden with Spice and Silkes, now vnder saile, 
Are smoothly gliding downe by Candie shoare 
To Malta, through our Mediterranean sea.
But who comes heare? How now. 

Enter a Merchant. 

Barabas, thy ships are safe, 
Riding in Malta Rhode: And all the Merchants 
With other Merchandize are safe arriu’d, 
And haue sent me to know whether your selfe 
Will come and custome them. 

The ships are safe thou saist, and richly fraught.

They are. 

VVhy then goe bid them come ashore, 
And bring withthem their bils of entry: 
I hope our credit in the Custome­house 
Will serue as well as I werepresent there. 
Goe send ’vm threescore Camels, thirtyMules, 
And twenty Waggons to bring vp the ware. 
But art thoumaster in a ship of mine, 
And is thy credit not enough for that? 

The veryCustome barely comes tomore 
Then many Merchants of the Towne areworth, 
And therefore farre exceeds my credit, Sir. 

Goe tell ’em the Iew of Malta sent thee, man. 
Tush, who amongst ’em knowes not Barrabas? 

I goe.

So then, there’s somewhat come. 
Sirra, which of my ships art thou Master off? 

Of the Speranza, Sir.

And saw’st thou not mine Argosie at Alexandria 
Thou couldst not come from Egypt, orby Caire 
But at the entry there into the sea, 
Where Nilus payes his tribute to the maine, 
Thou needs must saileby Alexandria. 

I neither saw them, nor inquir’d of them. 
But this we heard some ofour sea­men say, 
They wondred how you durst with so much wealth 
Trust such a crazed Vessell, and so farre. 

Tush; they are wise, I know her and her strength: 
By goe, goe thou thy wayes, discharge thy Ship, 
And bid my Factor bring his loading in. 
And yet I wonder at this Argosie, 

Enter a second Merchant. 

Thine Argosie from Alexandria, 
Know Barabas doth ride in Malta Rhode. 
Laden with riches, and exceeding store 
Of Persian silkes, of gold, and Orient Perle: 

How chance you came not with those other ships 
That sail’d by Egypt? 

Sir we saw ’em not.

Belike they coasted round by Candie shoare 
About their Oyles, or other businesses. 
But ’twas ill done of you to come so farre 
Without the ayd orconduct of their ships. 

Sir, we were wafted by a Spanish Fleet 
That neuer left vs till withina league, 
That had the Gallies of the Turke in chase. 

Oh they were going vp to Sicily: well, goe 
And bid the Merchants and my mendispatch 
And come ashore, and see the fraught discharg’d

I goe. 

Exit.

Thus trowles our fortune in by land and Sea, 
And thus are wee on euery side inrich’d: 
These arethe Blessings promis’dto the Iewes, 
And herein wasold Abrams happinesse: 
What more may Heaven doe for earthly man 
Then thustopowre out plenty intheir laps, 
Ripping the bowels of the earth for them, 
Making the Sea their seruants, and the winds 
To driue their substance withsuccessefull blasts? 
Who hateth me but for my happinesse? 
Or who is honour’d now but for his wealth? 
Rather had I a Iew behated thus, 
Then pittied in a Christian pouerty: 
For I can see no fruits in all their faith, 
But malice, falshood, and excessiue pride, 
Which me thinkes fits not their profession. 
Happily some haplesseman hath conscience, 
And for his conscience liues in beggery. 
They say we are a scatter’d Nation: 
I cannot tell, but we hauescambled vp 
More wealth by farre then those that bragof faith. 
There’s Kirriah Iairim, the greatIew of Greece, 
Obed in Bairseth, Nones in Portugall, 
My selfe in Malta, some in Italy, 
Many in France, and wealthy euery one: 
I, wealthier farre then any Christian. 
I must confesse we come not to be Kings: 
That’s not our fault: Alas, our number’s few, 
And Crownes come either by succession 
Or vrg’d by force; and nothing violent, 
Oft haue I heard tell, can be permanent. 
Giue vs a peacefullrule, make Christians Kings, 
That thirst so much for Principality. 
I haue no charge, nor many children, 
But one sole Daughter, whom I hold as deare 
As Agamemnon did his Iphigen: 
And all I haue is hers. But who comes here? 

Enter three Iewes. 

Tush, tell not me ’twas done of policie. 

Come therefore let vs goe to Barrabas; 
For he can counsell best in these affaires; 
And here he comes. 

Why how now Countrymen? 
Why flocke you thus to me in multitudes? 
What accident’s betided to the Iewes? 

A Fleet of warlike Gallyes, Barabas, 
Are come from Turkey, and lyein our Rhode: 
And they this day sit in the Counsell­house 
To entertaine them and their Embassie. 

Why let ’em come, so they come not to warre; 
Or let ’em warre, so we beconquerors: 
Nay, let ’em combat, conquer, and kill all, 

Aside. 

So they spare me, my daughter, and my wealth. 

Were it for confirmation of a League, 
They would not come in warlike manner thus. 

I feare their comming will afflict vs all. 

Fond men, what dreame youof their multitudes? 
What need they treat of peace that are in league? 
The Turkes and those of Malta are in league. 
Tut, tut, there issome othermatter in’t. 

Why, Barabas, they come for peace or warre. 

Happily for neither, but topasse along 
Towards Venice by the Adriatick Sea; 
With whomthey haueattempted many times, 
But neuer could effect their Stratagem. 

And very wisely sayd, it may be so. 

But there’s a meeting in the Senate­house, 
And all the Iewes in Malta must be there. 

Vmh; All the Iewes in Malta must be there? 
I, like enough, why then let euery man 
Prouide him, and bethere for fashion­sake. 
If any thing shall there concerne ourstate 
Assure your selues I’le looke vnto my selfe. 
 
I know you will; well brethren letvs goe.
 
aside, 
 
Let’s take our leaues; Farewell good Barabas. 

Doe so; Farewell Zaareth, farewell Temainte. 
And Barabas now search this secret out. 
Summon thy sences, callthy wits togethre: 
These silly men mistake the mattercleane. 
Long to the Turke did Malta contribute; 
Which Tribute all in policie, I feare, 
The Turkes haue let increase to such a summe,
As all the wealth of Malta cannot pay; 
And now by that aduantagethinkes, belike, 
To seize vpon the Towne: I, that heseekes. 
How erethe world goe, I’le makesure for one, 
And seeke in time to intercept theworst, 
Warily garding that which I ha got. 
Ego mihimet sum semper proximas. 
Why let ’em enter, let ’em take theTowne. 

Enter Gouernors of Malta, Knights met by 
Bassoes of the Turke; Calymath. 

Now Bassoes, what demand you at our hands?

Know Knights of Malta, that we came from Rhodes 
From Cyprus, Candy, and those other Iles 
That lye betwixt the Mediterranean seas.

What’s Cyprus, Candy, and those other Iles 
To vs, or Malta? What at our hands demand ye?

The ten yeares tribute that remaines vnpaid.

Alas, my Lord, the summe is ouergreat, 
I hope your Highnesse will consider vs. 

I wish, graue Gouernours ’twere in my power 
To fauour you, but ’tis my fathers cause, 
Wherein I maynot, nay I dare not dally. 

Then giue vs leaue, great Selim­Calymath. 

Stand allaside, and let the Knights determine, 
And send to keepe our Gallies vnder­saile, 
For happily we shall not tarry here: 
Now Gouernours how are you resolu’d? 

Thus: Since your hard conditions are such 
That you will needs haue ten yeares tribute past, 
We may haue time to make collection 
Amongst the Inhabitants of Malta for’t. 

That’s more then isin our Commission. 

What Callapine a little curtesie. 
Let’s know their time, perhaps it isnot long; 
And ’tis moreKingly to obtaine by peace 
Then to enforce conditions by constraint. 
Whatrespit aske you Gouernours? 

But a month. 

We grant a month, but see you keep your promise. 
Now lanch our Gallies backeagaine to Sea, 
VVhere wee’ll attend the respit you haue tane, 
And for themony send our messenger. 
Farewell great Gouernors, and braue Knights of Malta. 

Exeunt.

And all good fortunewait on Calymath. 
Goe one and call those Iewes of Malta hither: 
VVere they not summon’d to appeare to day. 

They were, my Lord, and here they come. 

Enter Barabas, and three Iewes. 

Haue you determin’d what to say to them?

Yes, giue me leaue, and Hebrwes now come neare. 
From the Emperour of Turkey is arriu’d 
Great Selim­Calymath, his Highnesse sonne, 
Toleuie of vs ten yeares tribute past, 
Now then here know that it concerneth vs: 

Then good my Lord, to keepeyour quiet still, 
Your Lordshipshall doe well to let themhaue it. 

Soft Barabas, there’s more longs too’t than so. 
To what this ten yeares tribute willamount 
That we haue cast, but cannotcompasse it 
By reason of the warres, that robb’d our store; 
And therefore are we to request your ayd. 

Alas, my Lord, we are no souldiers: 
And what’s our aid against so great a Prince? 

Tut, Iew, we know thou art no souldier; 
Thou arta Merchant, and a monied man, 
And ’tis thy mony, Barabas, we seeke. 

How, my Lord, my mony? 

Thine and the rest. 
For to be short, amongst you ’tmust be had,

Alas, my Lord, themost of vs arepoore. 

Then let the rich increaseyour portions: 

Are strangers with your tribute to be tax’d? 

Haue strangers leauewith vs to get their wealth? 
Then let them withvs contribute.

How, equally? 

No, Iew, like infidels. 
For through our sufferance of your hatefull liues, 
Who stand accursed inthe sight of heauen, 
These taxesand afflictions arebefal’ne, 
And therefore thus we are determined; 
Reade there the Articles of our decrees. 

First, the tribute mony ofthe Turkes shall all be 
Leuyed amongst the Iewes, and each of them to pay one 
Halfe of his estate. 

How, halfe his estate? I hope you meane not mine.

Read on. Read. Secondly, hee that denies to pay, shal straight be­
A Christian. (come

How a Christian? Hum, what’s here to doe?

Lastly, he that denies this, shall absolutely lose al he 

Oh my Lord we will giue halfe. 

Oh earth­mettall’d villaines, and no Hebrews born! 
And will youbasely thus submit your selues 
To leaue your goods to their arbitrament?

Why Barabas wilt thou be christned[·] 

No, Gouernour, I willbe no conuertite. 

Then pay thy halfe. 

Why know you what you did by this deuice? 
Halfe of my substance is a Cities wealth. 
Governour, it was not got so easily; 
Norwill I part so slightlytherewithall. 

Sir, halfe is the penalty of our decree, 
Either pay that, orwe will seize on all.

Corpo di deo; stay, you shall haue halfe, 
Letme be vs’d but asmy brethren are. 

No, Iew, thou hast denied theArticles, 
And now it cannot berecall’d. 

Will you thensteale my goods? 
Is theft the ground of your Religion? 

No, Iew, we take particularly thine 
To saue the ruine of a multitude: 
And better one want for a common good, 
Then many perish for a priuate man: 
Yet Barrabas we will not banish thee, 
But here in Malta, where thou gotst thy wealth, 
Liue still; and if thou canst, get more. 

Christians; what, or how can I multiply? 
Of nought is nothing made. 

From nought at first thou camst to little welth, 
From little vnto more, from more to most: 
If your first curse fall heauy on thy head,
And make thee poore and scorn[*]d of all the world, 
’Tis not our fault, but thy inherent sinne. 

What? bring you Scripture to confirm your wronge? 
Preach me not out of my possessions. 
Some Iewes are wicked, as all Christians are: 
But say the Tribethat I descended of 
Were all in generall cast away for sinne, 
Shall I be tryed by their transgression?  
The man that dealeth righteously shall liue: 
And which of you can charge me otherwise? 

Out wretched Barabas, sham’st thou not thus 
To iustifie thy selfe, as if we knew not 
Thy profession? If thou rely vpon thy righteousnesse, 
Be patient and thy riches willincrease. 
Excesse of wealth is cause of covetousnesse: 
And couetousnesse, oh ’tis a monstrous sinne. 

I, but theft is worse: tush, take not from me then, 
For that is theft; and if you rob me thus, 
I must be forc’d to steale and compasse more. 

Graue Gouernors, list not tohis exclames: 
Conuert his mansion to a Nunnery, 

Enter Officers. 

His house will harbour many holy Nuns. 

It shall be so: now Officers haueyou done? 

I, my Lord, we haue seiz’d vpon the goods 
And wares of Barabas, which being valued 
Amount to more then all the wealth in Malta. 
And of the other we haueseized halfe. 
Then wee’ll take order for theresidue. 

Well then my Lord, say, areyou satisfied? 
You haue my goods, my mony, and my wealth, 
My ships, my store, and all that I enioy’d; 
And hauing all, you can request no more; 
Vnlesse your vnrelenting flinty hearts 
Suppresse all pitty in your stony breasts,
And now shall move you to bereave my life. 

No, Barabas, tostaine our hands with blood 
Is farrefrom vs and our profession. 

Why I esteeme the iniury farrelesse, 
To take the liues of miserable men, 
Then be the causers of their misery. 
You haue my wealth the labour of my life, 
The comfort of mine age, my childrens hope, 
And therefore ne’re distinguish of the wrong. 

Content thee, Barabas, thou hast nought but right

Your extreme rightdoes me exceeding wrong: C2 But 
But take it to you i’th deuils name.  

Come, let vs in, and gather of these goods  
The mony for this tribute of the Turke.  

’Tis necessary that be look’d vnto:  
For if we breake our day, we breake the league,  
And that will proue but simple policie.  

Exeunt,  

I, policie? that’s their profession,  
And not simplicity, as they suggest.  
The plagues of Egypt, and the curse of heauen,  
Earths barrennesse, and all mens hatred  
Inflict vpon them, thou great Primas Motor.  
And here vpon my knees, striking the earth,  
I banne their soules to everlasting paines  
And extreme tortures of the fiery deepe,  
That thus haue dealt with me in my distresse.  

Oh yet be patient, gentle Barabas.  
Bar. Oh silly brethren, borne to see this day!  
Why stand you thus vnmou’d with my laments?  
Why weepe you not to thinke vpon my wrongs?  
Why pine not I, and dye in this distresse?  

Why, Barabas, as hardly can we brooke  
The cruell handling of our selues in this:  
Thou seest they haue taken halfe our goods.  

Why did you yeeld to their extortion?  
You were a multitude, and I but one,  
And of me onely haue they taken all.  

Yet brother Barabas remember Iob,  

What tell you me of Iob? I wot his wealth  
Was written thus: he had seuen thousand sheepe,  
Three thousand Camels, and two hundred yoake  
Of labouring Oxen, and fiue hundred  
Shee Asses: but for euery one of those,  
Had they beene valued at indifferent rate,  
I had at home, and in mine Argosie  
And other ships that came from Egypt last,  
As much as would haue bought his beasts and him,  
And yet haue kept enough to liue vpon;  
So that not he, but I may curse the day,  
Thy fatall birth­day, forlorne Barabas;  
And henceforth wish for an eternall night,  
That clouds of darknesse may inclose my flesh,  
And hide these extreme sorrowes from mine eyes:  
For onely I haue toyl’d to inherit here  
The months of vanity and losse of time,  
And painefull nights haue bin appointed me.  

Good Barabas be patient.  

I, I pray leave me in my patience.  
You that were ne’re possest of wealth, are pleas’d with  
But giue him liberty at least to mourne,  (want.  
That in a field amidst his enemies,  
Doth see his souldiers slaine, himselfe disarm’d,  
And knowes no meanes of his recouerie:  
I, let me sorrow for this sudden chance,  
’Tis in the trouble of my spirit I speake;  
Great iniuries are not so soone forgot.  

Come, let vs leaue him in his irefull mood,  
Our words will but increase his extasie.  

On then: but trust me ’tis a misery  
To see a man in such affliction:  
Farewell Barabas.  

Exeunt.  

I, fare you well.  
See the simplicitie of these base slaues,  
Who for the villaines haue no wit themselues,  
Thinke me to be a senselesse lumpe of clay  
That will with euery water wash to dirt:  
No, Barabas is borne to better chance,  
And fram’d of finer mold then common men,  
That measure nought but by the present time.  
A reaching thought will search his deepest wits,  
And cast with cunning for the time to come:  
For euils are apt to happen euery day  
But whither wends my beauteous Abigall?  

Enter Ahigall the Iewes daughter.  

Oh what has made my louely daughter sad?  
What? woman, moane not for a little losse:  
Thy father has enough in store for thee.  

Not for my selfe, but aged Barabas:  
Father, for thee lamenteth Abigaile:  
But I will learne to leaue these fruitlesse teares.  
And vrg’d thereto with my afflictions,  
With fierce exclaimes run to the Senate­house,  
And in the Senate reprehend them all,  
And rent their hearts with tearing of my haire,  
Till they reduce the wrongs done to my father.  

No, Abigail, things past recouery  
Are hardly cur’d with exclamations.  
Be silent, Daughter, sufferance breeds ease,  
And time may yeeld vs an occasion  
Which on the sudden cannot serue the turne.  
Besides, my girle, thinke me not all so fond  
As negligently to forgoe so much  
Without prouision for thy selfe and me.  
Ten thousand Portagues, besides great Perles,  
Rich costly Iewels, and Stones infinite,  
Fearing the worst of this before it fell,  
I closely hid.  

Where father?  

In my house my girle.  

Then shall they ne’re be seene of Barrabas:  
For they haue seiz’d vpon thy house and wares.  

But they will giue me leaue once more, I trow,  
To goe into my house.  

That may they not:  
For there I left the Gouernour placing Nunnes,  
Displacing me; and of thy house they meane  
To make a Nunnery, where none but their owne sect  
Must enter in; men generally barr’d.  

My gold, my gold, and all my wealth is gone.  
You partiall heauens, haue I deseru’d this plague?  
What will you thus oppose me, lucklesse Starres,  
To make me desperate in my pouerty?  
And knowing me impatient in distresse  
Thinke me so mad as I will hang my selfe,  
That I may vanish ore the earth in ayre,  
And leaue no memory that e’re I was.  
No, I will liue; nor loath I this my life:  
And since you leaue me in the Ocean thus  
To sinke or swim, and put me to my shifts,  
I’le rouse my senses, and awake my selfe.  
Daughter, I haue it: thou perceiu’st the plight  
Wherein these Christians haue oppressed me:  
Be rul’d by me, for in extremitie  
We ought to make barre of no policie.  

Father, what e’re it be to iniure them  
That haue so manifestly wronged vs,  
What will not Abigall attempt? (my house  

Why so; then thus, thou toldst me they haue turn’d  
Into a Nunnery, and some Nuns are there.  

I did.  

Then Abigall, there must my girle  
Intreat the Abbasse to be entertain’d.  

How, as a Nunne?  

I, Daughter, for Religion  
Hides many mischiefes from suspition.  

I, but father they will suspect me there.  

Let ’em suspect, but be thou so precise  
As they may thinke it done of Holinesse.  
Intreat ’em faire, and giue them friendly speech,  
And seeme to them as if thy sinnes were great,  
Till thou hast gotten to be entertain’d.  

Thus father shall I much dissemble.  

Tush, as good dissemble that thou neuer mean’st  
As first meane truth, and then dissemble it,  
A counterfet profession is better  
Then vnseene hypocrisie.  

Well father, say I be entertain’d,  
What then shall follow?  

This shall follow then;  
There haue I hid close underneath the plancke  
That runs along the vpper chamber floore,  
The gold and Iewels which I kept for thee.  
But here they come; be cunning Abigall.  

Then father goe with me.  

No, Abigall, in this  
It is not necessary I be seene.  
For I will seeme offended with thee for’t.  
Be close, my girle, for this must fetch my gold. 
 
Enter three Fryars and two Nuns. 

Sisters, we now are almost at the new made Nun­ 

The better; for we loue not to be seene: (nery.  
’Tis 30 winters long since some of vs  
Did stray so farre amongst the multitude.  

But, Madam, this house  
And waters of this new made Nunnery  
Will much delight you.  

It may be so: but who comes here?  

Grave Abbasse, and you happy Virgins guide,  
Pitty the state of a distressed Maid.  

What art thou daughter?  

The hopelesse daughter of a haplesse Iew,  
The Iew of Malta, wretched Barabas;  
Sometimes the owner of a goodly house,  
Which they haue now turn’d to a Nunnery.  

Well, daughter, say, what is thy suit with vs?  

Fearing the afflictions which my father feeles,  
Proceed from sinne, or want of faith in vs,  
I’de passe away my life in penitence,  
And be a Nouice in your Nunnery,  
To make attonement for my labouring soule. (spirit.  

No doubt, brother, but this proceedeth of the  

I, and of a moving spirit too, brother; but come,  
Let vs intreat she may be entertain’d.  

Well, daughter, we admit you for a Nun.  

First let me as a Novice learne to frame  
My solitary life to your streight lawes,  
And let me lodge where I was wont to lye,  
I doe not doubt by your divine precepts  
And mine owne industry, but to profit much.  

As much I hope as all I hid is worth.  

aside.  

Come daughter, follow vs.  

Why how now Abigall, what mak’st thou  
Amongst these hateful Christians?  

Hinder her not, thou man of little faith,  
For she has mortified her selfe.  

How, mortified I!  

And is admitted to the Sister­hood.  

Child of perdition, and thy fathers shame,  
What wilt thou doe among these hatefull fiends?  
I charge thee on my blessing that thou leaue  
These diuels, and their damned heresie.  

Father giue me —  

Nay backe, Abigall,  
And thinke vpon the Iewels and the gold,  

Whispers  
to her. 

The boord is marked thus that couers it.   
Away accursed from thy fathers sight.  

Barabas, although thou art in mis­beleefe,  
And wilt not see thine owne afflictions,  
Yet let thy daughter be no longer blinde.  

Blind, Fryer, I wrecke not thy perswasions.  
The boord is marked thus † that couers it,  
For I had rather dye, then see her thus.  
Wilt thou forsake mee too in my distresse,  
Seduced Daughter, Goe forget net.  

aside to her.  

Becomes it Iewes to be so credulous,  
To morrow early Il’e be at the doore.  

aside to her.  

No come not at me, if thou wilt be damn’d,  
Forget me, see me not, and so be gone.  
Farewell, Remember to morrow morning.  

aside.  

Out, out thou wretch.
  
Enter Mathias.

Whose this? Faire Abigall the rich Iewes daugh­ 
Become a Nun, her fathers sudden fall  (ter  
Has humbled her and brought her downe to this:  
Tut, she were fitter for a tale of loue  
Then to be tired out with Orizons:  
And better would she farre become a bed  
Embraced in a friendly louers armes,  
Then rise at midnight to a solemne masse.  

Enter Lodowicke.  

Why how now Don Mathias, in a dump?  

Beleeue me, Noble Lodowicke, I haue seene  
The strangest sight, in my opinion,  
That euer I beheld.  

What wast I prethe?  

A faire young maid scarce 14 yeares of age,  
The sweetest flower in Citherea’s field,  
Cropt from the pleasures of the fruitfull earth,  
And strangely metamorphis’d Nun.  

But say, What was she?  

Why the rich Iewes daughter.  

What Barabas, whose goods were lately seiz’d?  
Is she so faire?  

And matchlesse beautifull;  
As had you seene her ’twould haue mou’d your heart,  
Tho countermin’d with walls of brasse, to loue,  
Or at the least to pitty.  

And if she be so faire as you report,  
’Twere time well spent to goe and visit her:  
How say you, shall we?  

I must and will, Sir, there’s no remedy.  

And so will I too, or it shall goe hard.  
Farewell Mathias.  

Farewell Lodowicke. 
Exeunt.  
 
Actus Secundus. 

Enter Barabas with a light. 

THus like the sad presaging Rauen that tolls 
The sicke mans passeport in her hollow beake, 
And in the shadow of the silent night 
Doth shake contagion from her sable wings;
Vex’d and tormented runnes poore Barabas 
With fatall curses towards these Christians. 
The incertaine pleasures of swift­footed time 
Haue tane their flight, and left me in despaire; 
And of my formerriches rests no more 
But bare remembrance; like a souldiers skarre, 
That has no further comfort for his maime. 
Oh thou that with a fierypiller led’st 
The sonnes of Israel through thedismall shades, 
Light Abrahams off­spring; and direct the hand 
Of Abigall this night; or let the day 
Turne to eternall darkenesse after this: 
No sleepe can fasten on my watchfulleyes, 
Nor quiet enter my distemper’d thoughts, 
TillI haue answer of my Abigall. 

Enter Abigall aboue. 

Now haue I happily espy’d a time 
To search the plancke my father did appoint; 
And here behold (vnseene) where I haue found 
The gold, the perles, and Iewelswhich he hid. 

Now I remember those old womens words, 
Who in my wealth wud tell me winters tales, 
And speake of spirits and ghosts that glide by night 
About theplace where Treasure hath bin hid: 
And now me thinkes that I am one of those: 
For whilst I liue, here liues my soulessole hope, 
And when I dye, here shall my spirit walke. 

Now that my fathers fortunewere so good
As but to be about this happy place;  
’Tis not so happy: yet when we parted last,  
He said he wud attend me in the morne.  
Then, gentle sleepe, where e’re his bodie rests,  
Give charge to Morpheus that he may dreame  
A golden dreame, and of the sudden walke,  
Come and receiue the Treasure I haue found.  

Birn para todos, my ganada no er:  
As good goe on, as fit so sadly thus.  
But stay, what starre shines yonder in the East?  
The Loadstarre of my life, if Abigall.  
Who’s there?  

Who’s that?  

Peace, Abigal, ’tis I.  

Then father here receiue thy happinesse.  

Hast thou’t? 

Throwes downe bags,  

Here,  
Hast thou’t?  
There’s more, and more, and more.  

Oh my girle,  
My gold, my fortune, my felicity;  
Strength to my soule, death to mine enemy;  
Welcome the first beginner of my blisse:  
Oh Aigal, Abigal, that I had thee here too,  
Then my desires were fully satisfied,  
But I will practise thy enlargement thence:  
Oh girle, oh gold, oh beauty, oh my blisse! 

hugs his bags  

Father, it draweth towards midnight now,  
And ’bout this time the Nuns begin to wake;  
To shun suspition, therefore, let vs part.  

Farewell my ioy, and by my fingers take  
A kisse from him that sends it from his soule.  
Now Phœbus ope the eye­lids of the day,  
And for the Rauen wake the morning Larke,  
That I may houer with her in the Ayre;  
Singing ore these, as she does ore her young.  
Hermoso Piarer, de les Denireh. 

Exeunt.  

Enter Governor, Martin del Bosco, the knights. 

Now Captaine tell vs whither thou art bound? 
Whence is thy ship that anchors in our Rhoad? 
And why thou cam’st ashore without our leaue? 

Governor of Malta, hither am I bound; 
My Ship, the flying Dragon, is of Spaine, 
And so am I, Delbosco is my name; 
Vizadmirall vnto theCatholike King. 

’Tis true, my Lord, therefore intreat him well. 

Our fraught is Grecians, Turks, and Africk Moores. 
For late vpon the coast of Corsica, 
Because we vail’d not to the Spanish Fleet, 
Their creeping Gallyes had vs inthe chase: 
But suddenly the wind began to rise, 
And then we left, and tooke, and foughtat ease: 
Some have we fir’d, and many haue we sunke; 
But oneamongst the rest became our prize: 
The Captain’s slaine, therest remaine our slaues, 
Of whom we would make sale in Malta here. 

Martin del Bosco, I haue heard of thee; 
Welcome to Malta, and to all of vs; 
But to admit a sale of these thy Turkes 
We maynot, nay we dare not giue consent 
By reason of a Tributary league. 

Delbosco, as thou louestand honour’st vs, 
Perswade our Gouernor against the Turke; 
This truce we haue is but in hope of gold, 
And with that summe he craues might we wage warre. 

Will Knights of Malta be in league with Turkes, 
And buy it basely too for summes ofgold? 
My Lord, Remember that to Europ’s shame, 
The Christian Ile of Rhodes, from whence you came, 
Was lately lost, and you were stated here 
To be at deadly enmity with Turkes 

Captaine we know it, but our forceis small: 

What is the summe that Calymath requires? 

A hundred thousand Crownes. 

My Lord and King hath title to this Isle,  
And he meanes quickly to expell you hence;  
Therefore be rul’d by me, and keepe the gold:  
I’le write unto his Maiesty for ayd,  
And not depart vntill I see you free.  

On this condition shall thy Turkes be sold.  
Goe Officers and set them straight in shew.  
Bosco, thou shalt be Malta’s Generall;  
We and our warlike Knights will follow thee  
Against these barbarous mis­beleeuing Turkes.  

So shall you imitate those you succeed:  
For when their hideous force inuiron’d Rhodes,  
Small though the number was that kept the Towne,  
They fought it out, and not a man suruiu’d  
To bring the haplesse newes to Christendome.  

So will we fight it out; come, let’s away:  
Proud­daring Calymath, instead of gold,  
Wee’ll send the bullets wrapt in smoake and fire:  
Claime tribute where thou wilt, we are resolu’d,  
Honor is bought with bloud and not with gold. 

Extunt 
 
Enter Officers with slaues.
  
This is the Market­place, here let ’em stand:  
Feare not their sale, for they’ll be quickly bought.  

Euery ones price is written on his backe,  
And so much must they yeeld or not be sold. 

Ent. Bar.  

Here comes the Iew, had not his goods bin seiz’d,  
He’de giue vs present mony for them all. 
 
Enter Barabas.  

Bar, In spite of these swine­eating Christians,  
(Vnchosen Nation, neuer circumciz’d;  
Such as poore villaines were ne’re thought vpon  
Till Titus and Vespasian conquer’d vs.)  
Am I become as wealthy as I was:  
They hop’d my daughter would ha bin a Nun;  
But she’s at home, and I haue bought a house  
As great and faire as is the Gouernors;  
And there in spite of Malta will I dwell:  
Hauing  
Hauing Fernezes hand, whose heart I’le haue;  
I, and his sonnes too, or it shall goe hard.  
I am not of the Tribe of Levy, I,  
That can so soone forget an iniury.  
We Iewes can fawne like Spaniels when we please;  
And when we grin we bite, yet are our lookes  
As innocent aud harmelesse as a Lambes.  
I learn’d in Florence how to kisse my hand,  
Heave vp my shoulders when they call me dogge,  
And ducke as low as any bare­foot Fryar,  
Hoping to see them starue vpon a stall,  
Or else be gather’d for in our Synagogue;  
That when the offering­Bason comes to me,  
Euen for charity I may spit intoo’t.  
Here comes Don Lodowicke the Gouernor’s sonne,  
One that I loue for his good fathers sake. 
 
Enter Lodowicke.  

I heare the wealthy Iew walked this way;  
I’le seeke him out, and so insinuate,  
That I may haue a sight of Abigall;  
For Don Mathias tels me she is faire.  

Now will I shew my selfe to haue more of the Ser­ 
Then the Doue; that is, more knaue than foole. (pent  

Yond walks the Iew, now for faire Abigall.  

I, I, no doubt but shee’s at your command.  

Barabas, thou know’st I am the Gouernors sonne.  

I wud you were his father too, Sir, that’s al the harm  
I wish you: the slaue looks like a hogs cheek new sindg’d.  

Whither walk’st thou Barabas?  

No further: ’tis a custome held with vs,  
That when we speake with Gentiles like to you,  
We turne into the Ayre to purge our selues:  
For vnto vs the Promise doth belong.  

Well, Barabas, canst helpe me to a Diamond?  

Oh, Sir, your father had my Diamonds.  
Yet I haue one left that will serve your turne:  
I meane my daughter: — but e’re he shall haue her  
I’le sacrifice her on a pile of wood.  

aside.  

I ha the poyson of the City for him, and the  
White leprosie.  

What sparkle does it give without a foile?  

The Diamond that I talke of, ne’r was foild:  
But when he touches it, it will be foild:  
Lord Lodowicke, it sparkles bright and faire.  

Is it square or pointed, pray let me know.  

Pointed it is, good Sir, — but not for you.  

aside  

I like it much the better.  

So doe I too.  

How showes it by night?  
Bar Out shines Cinthia’s rayes:  
Yeu’le like it better farre a nights than dayes.  

aside.  

And what’s the price?  

Your life and if you haue it. — Oh my Lord  
We will not iarre about the price; come to my house  
And I will giu’t your honour — with a vengeance.  

aside  

No, Barabas, I will deserue it first.  

Good Sir, your father has deseru’d it at my hands,  
Who of meere charity and Christian ruth,  
To bring me to religious purity,  
And as it were in Catechising sort,  
To make me mindfull of my mortall sinnes,  
Against my will, and whether I would or no,  
Seiz’d all I had, and thrust me out a doores,  
And made my house a place for Nuns most chast.  

No doubt your soule shall reape the fruit of it.  

I, but my Lord, the haruest is farre off:  
And yet I know the prayers of those Nuns  
And holy Fryers, hauing mony for their paines,  
Are wondrous; and indeed doe no man good:  

aside.  

And seeing they are not idle, but still doing,  
’Tis likely they in time may reape some fruit,  
I meane in fulnesse of perfection.  

Good Barabas glance not at our holy Nuns.  

No, but I doe it through a burning zeale,  
Hoping ere long to set the house a fire;  
For though they doe a while increase and multiply,  

aside.  

I’le haue a saying to that Nunnery.  
As for the Diamond, Sir, I told you of,  
Come home and there’s no price shall make vs part,  
Euen for your Honourable fathers sake.  
It shall goe hard but I will see your death,  

aside.  

But now I must be gone to buy a slaue.  

And, Barabas, I’le beare thee company.  

Come then, here’s the marketplace; whats the price  
Of this slaue, 200 Crowns? Do the Turke weigh so much?  

Sir, that’s his price.  

What, can he steale that you demand so much?  
Belike he has some new tricke for a purse;  
And if he has, he is worth 300 plats.  
So that, being bought, the Towne­seale might be got  
To keepe him for his life time from the gallowes.  
The Sessions day is criticall to theeues,  
And few or none scape but by being purg’d.  

Ratest thou this Moore but at 200 plats?  

No more, my Lord.  

Why should this Turke be dearer then that Moore?  

Because he is young and has more qualities.  

What, hast the Philosophers stone? and thou hast,  
Breake my head with it, I’le forgiue thee.  

No Sir, I can cut and shaue.  

Let me see, sirra, are you not an old shauer?  

Alas, Sir, I am a very youth.  

A youth? I’le buy you, and marry you to Lady va­ 
If you doe well. (nity  

I will serue you, Sir.  

Some wicked trick or other. It may be vnder colour  
Of shauing, thou’lt cut my throat for my goods.  
Tell me, hast thou thy health well?  

I, passing well.  

So much the worse; I must haue one that’s sickly,  
And be but for sparing vittles: ’tis not a stone of beef a day  
Will maintaine you in these chops; let me see one 
That’s some what leaner.

Here’s a leaner, how like you him?

Where was thou borne?

In Trace; brought vp in Arabia. 

So much the better, thou art for my turne, 
An hundred Crownes, I’le hauehim; there’s thecoyne.

Then marke him, Sir, and take him hence.

I, marke him, you were best, for this is he 
That by my helpeshall doe much villanie. 
My Lord farewell: Come Sirra youare mine. 
As for the Diamond it shallbe yours; 
I pray, Sir, be no stranger at my house, 
All that I haueshall beat your command. 

Enter Mathias, Mater. 

What makes the Iew and Lodowicke so priuate? 
I feare me ’tis about faire Abigall. 

Yonder comes Don Mathias, let vs stay; 
He loues my daughter, and sheholds him deare: 
But I haue sworne tofrustrate both their hopes, 
And be reveng’d upon the — Gouernor. 

This Moore is comeliest, is he not? speake son. 

No, this isthe better, mother, view this well. 

Seeme not to know mehere before your mother 
Lest she mistrust the match that is in hand: 
When you haue brought her home, cometomy house; 
Thinke of me as thy father; Sonne farewell. 

But wherefore talk’d Don Lodowick with you?

Tush man, we talk’d of Diamonds, not of Abigal. 

Tell me, Mathias, isnot that the Iew? 

As for theCommenton the Machabees 
I haue it, Sir, and ’tis at your command.

Yes, Madam, and my talke with him was 
About the borrowing of a booke or two. (uen. 

Conuerse not with him, he is cast off from hea­
Thou hast thy Crownes, fellow, come let’s away.

exeunt 

Sirra, Iew, rememberthe booke. 

Marry will I, Sir. 

Come, I hauemade a reasonable market, let’s away.

Now let me know thy name, and there withall 
Thybirth, condition, and profession.

Faith, Sir, my birth is but meane, my name’s Ithimer, 
My profession what you please. 

Hast thou no Trade? then listen to my words, 
And I will teach that shall sticke by thee: 
First be thou voyd of these affections, 
Compassion, loue, vaine hope, and hartlesse feare, 
Be mou’d at nothing, see thou pitty none, 
But to [*]hy selfe smile when the Christians moane. 

Oh braue, master, I worship your nose for this. 

As for my selfe, I walke abroad a nights 
And kill sicke people groaning under walls: 
Sometimes I goe about and poyson wells; 
And now and then, to cherish Christian theeves, 
I am content to lose some of my Crownes; 
That I may, walking in my Gallery, 
See ’em goe pinion’d along by my doore. 
Being young I studiedPhysicke, and began 
To practise first vpon the Italian; 
There I enric’d the Priests with burials, 
And alwayes kept the Sexton’s armes in vre 
With digging graues and ringing dead mens knels:
And after that wasI an Engineere, 
And in the warres ’twixt France and Germanie, 
Vnder pretence of helping Charles the fifth, 
Slew friend and enemy withmy stratagems. 
Then after that was I an Vsurer, 
And with extorting, cozening, forfeiting, 
And tricks belonging vnto Brokery, 
I fill’d the Iaileswith Bankrouts in a yeare, 
And with young Orphans plantedHospitals, 
And euery Moone madesome or other mad, 
And now and thenone hang himselfe for griefe, 
Pinning vpon his breast a longgreat Scrowle 
How I with interest tormented him. 
But marke how I am blest for plaguing them, 
I haue as much coyne as will buy the Towne. 
But tell menow, How hast thouspent thy time? 

Faith, Master, in setting Christian villages on fire, 
Chaining of Eunuches, binding gally­slaues. 
One time I was an Hostler in anInne, 
And in the night time secretly would I steale 
To trauellers Chambers, and there cut their throats: 
Once at Ierusalem, where the pilgrims kneel’d, 
I strowed powder on the Marble stones, 
And therewithall their knees would ranckle, so 
That I haue laugh’d agood to see the cripples 
Goe limping home to Christendome on stilts. 

Why this is something: make account of me 
As of thy fellow; we are villaines both: 
Both circumcized, we hate Christians both: 
Be true and secret, thou shalt want no gold. 
But stand aside, herecomes Don Lodowicke. 

Enter Lodowicke.

Oh Barabas well met; where is the Diamond 
You told me of?

I haueit for you, Sir; please you walke in with me: 
What, ho, Abigall; open the doore I say. 

Enter Abigall. 

In good time, father, here are letters come 
From Ormus, and thePost stayes here within. 

Giue me the letters, daughter, doe you heare? 
Entertaine Lodowicke the Gouernors sonne 
With all the curtesie youcan affoord; 
Prouided, that youkeepe your Maiden­head. 
Vse him asif he were a Philistine. 

aside. 

Dissemble, sweare, protest, vow to loue him, 
He is not of the seed of Abraham. 
I am a little busie, Sir, pray pardon me. 
Abigall, bid him welcome for my sake. 

For your sake and his own he’s welcome hither. 
 
Daughter, a word more; kisse him, speake him faire, 
And like a cunning Iew so cast about, 
That ye be both made suree’re you come out. 

Oh father, Don Mathias is my loue. 

I know it: yetI say makeloue to him; 
Doe, it isrequisite it should beso. 
Nay on my life it is my Factors hand, 
But goeyou in, I’le thinke vpon theaccount: 
The account is made, for Lodowicke dyes. 
My Factor sends me word a Merchant’s fled 
That owes me for a hundred Tun of Wine: 
I weigh it thus much; I haue wealth enough. 
For now by this has he kist Abigall; 
And she vowes loue to him, and hee to her. 
As sure as heauen rain’d Manna for the Iewes, 
So sure shall he and Don Mathias dye: 
His father was my chiefest enemie. 
Whither goes Don Mathias? stay a while. 

Enter Mathias.

Wither but to my faire loue Abigall? 

Thou know’st, and heauen can witnesse itis true, 
That I intend my daughter shall be thine.

I, Barabas, orelsethou wrong’st me much:

Oh heauen forbid I should haue such a thought. 
Pardon me though I weepe; the Gouernors sonne 
Will, whether I will or no, haue Abigall: 
He sends her letters, bracelets, jewels, rings. 

Does she receiue them? 

Shee? No, Mathias, no, but sends them backe, 
And when he comes, she lockes her selfe vp fast; 
Yet through the key[·]hole will he talke to her, 
While she runs tothe window looking out 
When you should come and hale him from the doore: 

Oh treacherous Lodowicke!

Even now as I came home, he slipt me in, 
And I amsure he is with Abigall.

I’le rouze him thence.  

Not for all Malta, therefore sheath your sword; 
If you loue me, no quarrels in my house; 
But steale you in, and seeme tosee himnot; 
I’le giue him such a warning e’re he goes 
As he shallhaue small hopes of Abigall. 
Away, for here they come, 

Enter Lodowicke, Abigall. 

What hand in hand, I cannot suffer this.

Mathias, as thou lou’st me, not a word. 

Well, letit passe, another time shall serue.
 
Exit.

Barabas, is not that the widowes sonne? 

I, and take heed, for he hath sworne your death. 

My death? what is the base borne peasant mad? 

No, no, but happily he stands in feare 
Of that which you, I thinke, ne’re dreame vpon, 
My daughter here, a paltry silly girle. Lod. 
Why loues she Don Mathias? 

Doth she not with her smiling answer you? 

He has my heart, I smile against my will.

Barabas, thou know’st I haue lou’d thy daughter 
(long. Bar. And so has she done you, euen from a child. 

And now I can no longer hold my minde. 

Nor I the affection that I beare to you. 

Thisis thy Diamond, tell me, shall I haue it? 

Win it, and weare it, it isyet vnsoyl’d, 
Oh but I know your Lordshipwud disdaine 
To marry with the daughter of a Iew: 
And yer I’le giue her many a golden crosse 
With Christian posies round about the ring. 

’Tis not thy wealth, but her that I esteeme, 
Yet craue I thy consent. 

And mine you haue, yet let me talke to her; 
This off­spring of Cain, this Iebusite 
That neuer tasted of the Passeouer, 
Nor e’re shall see the land of Canaan,  
Nor our Messias that is yet to come, 

aside.  

This gentle Magot Lodowicke I meane,  
Must be deluded: let him haue thy hand,  
But keepe thy heart till Don Mathias comes.  

What shall I be betroth’d to Lodowicke?  

It’s no sinne to deceiue a Christian;  
For they them selues hold it a principle,  
Faith is not to be held with Heretickes;  
But all are Hereticks that are not Iewes;  
This followes well, and therefore daughter feare not.  
I haue intreated her, and she will grant.  

Then gentle Abigal plight thy faith to me.  

I cannot chuse, seeing my father bids:  
Nothing but death shall part my loue and me.  

Now haue I that for which my soule hath long’d.  

So haue not I, but yet I hope I shall.  

aside.  

Oh wretched Abigal, what hast thee done?  

Why on the sudden is your colour chang’d?  

I know not, but farewell, I must be gone.  

Stay her, but let her not speake one word more.  

Mute a the sudden; here’s a sudden change.  

Oh muse not at it, ’tis the Hebrewes guize,  
That maidens new betroth’d should weepe a while:  
Trouble her not, sweet Lodowicke depart:  
Shee is thy wife, and thou shalt be mine heire.  

Oh, is’t the custome, then I am resolu’d:  
But rathe let the brightsome heauens be dim,  
And Natures beauty choake with stifeling clouds,  
Then my faire Abigal should frowne on me.  
There comes the villaine, now I’le be reueng’d. 
 
Enter Mathias.  

Be quiet Lodowicke, it is enough  
That I haue made thee sure to Abigal.  

Well, let him goe.  

Exit.  

Well, but for me, as you went in at dores  
You had bin stab’d, but not a word on’t now;  
Here must no speeches passe, nor swords be drawne.  

Suffer me, Barabas, but to follow him. 

No; so shall I, if any hurt bedone, 
Be made an accessary of your deeds; 
Reuenge it on him when you meet him next. 

For this I’le haue his heart.  

Doe so; loe here I giue thee Abigall.  

What greater gift can poore Mathias haue?  
Shall Lodowicke rob me of so faire a loue? 
My life is not so deare as Abigall.

My heart misgiues me, that to crosse your loue, 
Hee’s with your mother, therefore after him.

What, is he gone vnto my mother?

Nay, if you will, stay till she comes her selfe. 

I cannot stay; for if my mother come, 
Shee’ll dye with griefe.

Exit.

I cannot take my leaue of him for teares: 
Father, why haue you thus incenst them both? 

What’s that to thee? 

I’le make ’emfriends againe. 

You’ll make ’em friends? are there not Iewes 
Enow in Malta. 
But thou must dotevpon a Christian? 

I will haue Don Mathias, he is my loue.

Yes, you shall haue him: Goe put her in. 

I, I’le put her in. 

Now tell me, Ithimore, how lik’st thou this? 

Faith Master, I thinke by this 
You purchase both their liues; is it not so? 

True; and it shallbe cunningly perform’d. 

Oh, master, that I might hauea handinthis. 

I, so thoushalt, ’tis thou must doe the deed: 
Take this and beare it to Mathias streight, 
And tell him that it comes from Lodowicke

’Tis poyson’d, is itnot?

No, no, and yetit might be done that way: 
Itis a challenge feign’d from Lodowicke. 

Feare not, I’le so set his heart a fire, that he 
Shall verily thinke it comes from him.  

I cannot choose but like thy readinesse:  
Yet be not rash, but doe it cunningly.  

As I behaue my selfe in this, imploy me hereafter.  

Away then. 
 
Exit.  

So, now will I goe in to Lodowicke,  
And like a cunning spirit feigne some lye,  
Till I haue set ’em both at enmitie. 

Exit  

Actus Tertius.  

Enter a Curtezane.  

SInce this Towne was besieg’d, my gaine growes cold  
The time has bin, that but for one bare night  
A hundred Duckets haue bin freely giuen:  
But now against my will I must be chast.  
And yet I know my beauty doth not faile.  
From Venice Merchants, and from Padua,  
Were wont to come rare witted Gentlemen,  
Schollers I meane, learned and liberall;  
And now, saue Pilia­borza, comes there none,  
And he is very seldome from my house;  
And here he comes.  

Enter Pilia­borza. 
 
Hold thee, wench, there’s something for thee to  

’Tis siluer, I disdaine it. (spend.  

I, but the Iew has gold,  
And I will haue it or it shall goe hard.  

Tell me, how cam’st thou by this? (dens  

Faith, walking the backe lanes through the Gar­ 
I chanc’d to cast mine eye vp to the Iewes counting­house  
Where I saw some bags of mony, and in the night I  
Clamber’d vp with my hooks, and as I was taking  
My choyce, I heard a rumbling in the house; so I tooke  
Onely this, and runne my way: but here’s the Iews man. 

Enter Ithimore. 

Hide the bagge.

Looke not towards him, let’s away: 
Zoon’s what a looking thou keep’st, 
Thou’lt betraye’s anon. 

O the sweetest face that euer I beheld! I know she is 
A Curtezane by her attire: now would I giue a hundred 
Of the Iewes Crownes that I had such a Concubine. 
Well, I haue deliuer’d the challenge insuch sort, 
As meet they will, and fighting dye; braue sport. 

Exit. 

Enter Mathias.

This is the place, now Abigall shall see 
Whether Mathias holds her deareor no. 

Enter Lodow. reading.

What, dares the villain write in such base terms? 

I did it, and reuenge it if thou dar’st. 

Fight: Enter Barabas aboue. 

Oh brauely fought, and yet they thrust not home. 
Now Lodowicke, now Mathias, so; 
So now they haue shew’d themselues to be tall fellowes. 

Part ’em, part ’em. 

I, part ’em now they are dead: Farewell, farewell. 

Exit. 

Enter Gouernor. Mater.

What sight is this? my Lodowicke slaine! 
These armes of mine shall be thy Sepulchre. 
Mater, Who is this? my sonne Mathias slaine!

Oh Lodowicke! hadst thou perish’d by theTurke, 
Wretched Ferneze might haue veng’d thy death.

Thy sonne slew mine, and I’le reuenge his death.

Looke, Katherin, looke, thy sonnegaue mine these 

O leaue to griue me, I am grieu’d enough. (wouds 

Oh that my sighs could turne to liuely breath; 
And these my tearesto blood, that hemight liue.

Whomade themenemies? 

I know not, and that grieues me most of all.

My sonnelou’d thine. 

And so did Lodowicke him.

Lend me that weapon that did kill my sonne, 
And it shall murder me.

Nay Madem stay, that weapon was my son’s, 
And on that rathershould Ferneze dye.

Hold, let’s inquire the causers of their deaths, 
That we mayvenge their blood vpon their heads. 

Then take them vp, and let them be interr’d 
Within one sacred monument of stone; 
Vpon which Altar I will offer vp 
My daily sacrifice of sighes and teares, 
And with my prayers pierce impartiall heauens, 
Till they the causers of our smarts, 
Which forc’d their hands diuide vnited hearts: 
Come, Katherina, our losses equall are, 
Then of true griefelet vs take equall share. 

Exeunt. 

Enter Ithimore. 

Why was there euer seene such villany, so neatly 
Plotted, and so wellperform’d? both held in hand, and F
latly both beguil’d. 

Enter Abigall. 

Why how now Ithimore, why laugh’st thou so?

Oh, Mistresse, ha ha ha. 

Why what ayl’st thou? 

Oh my master. 

Ha. 

Oh Mistris! I haue the brauest, grauest, secret, subtil 
Bottle­nos’d knaue to my Master, that euer Gentleman had 

Say, knaue, why rail’st vpon my fatherthus? 

Oh, my master has thebrauest policy. 

Wherein? Ith. Why, know you not? 

Why no. 

Know you not of Mathia & Don Lodowick disaster? 

No, what was it?  

Why the deuil inuented a challenge, my Mr. writ it,  
And I carried it, first to Lodowicke, and imprimis to Mathia.  
And then they met, as the story sayes,  
In dolefull wise they ended both their dayes.  

And was my father furtherer of their deaths?  

Am I Ithimore?  

Yes.  

So sure did your father write, & I cary the chalenge.  

Well, Ithimore, let me request thee this,  
Goe to the new made Nunnery, and inquire  
For any of the Fryars of St. Iaynes,  
And say, I pray them come and speake with me.  

I pray, mistris, wil you answer me to one question?  

Well, sirra, what is’t?  

A very feeling one; haue not the Nuns fine sport  
With the Fryars now and then?  

Go to, sirra sauce, is this your question? get ye gon  

I will forsooth, Mistris.  

Exit  

Hard­hearted Father, unkind Barabas,  
Was this the pursuit of thy policie?  
To make me shew them fauour seuerally,  
That by my fauour they should both be slaine?  
Admit thou lou’dst not Lodowicke for his sinne,  
Yet Don Mathias ne’re offended thee:  
But thou wert set vpon extreme reuenge,  
Because the Pryor dispossest thee once,  
And couldst not venge it, but vpon his sonne,  
Nor on his sonne, but by Mathias meanes;  
Nor on Mathias, but by murdering me.  
But I perceiue there is no loue on earth,  
Pitty in Iewes, nor piety in Turkes.  
But here Comes cursed Ithimore with the Fryar.
 
Enter Ithimore. Fryar.  

Virgo, salve.  

When ducke you?  

Welcome graue Fryar Ithamore: begon,  

Exit  

Know, holy Sir, I am bold to sollicite thee. 

Wherein?  

To get me be admitted for a Nun.  

Why Abigal it is not yet long since  
That I did labour thy admition, 
And then thou didst not like that holy life. 

Then were my thoughts so fraile& vnconfirm’d, 
And I was chain’d to follies of the world: 
But now experience, purchased with griefe, 
Has made mesee the difference of things. 
My sinfull soule, alas, hath pac’d too long 
The fatall Labyrinth of misbeleefe, 
Farre from the Sonne that giues eternall life. 

Who taught thee this? 

The Abbasse of the house, 
Whose zealous admonition I embrace: 
Oh therefore, Iacomi, let me be one, 
Although unworthy of that Sister­hood. 

Abigal I will, but see, thouchange no more, 
For that will be most heauy tothy soule.

That was my father’s fault. 

Thy father’s, how? 

Nay, you shall pardon me: oh Barabas, 
Though thou deseruest hardly at my hands, 
Yet neuer shall these lips bewray thy life.

Come, shall we goe? 

My duty waits on you. 

Exeunt. 

Enter Barabas reading a letter. 

What, Abigall becomea Nunneagaine? 
False, and vnkinde; whathast thou lost thy father? 
And all vnknowne, and vnconstrain’d of me, 
Art thou againe got to the Nunnery? 
Now here she writes, and wils me to repent. 
Repentance? Spurca: what pretendeth this? 
I feare she knowes (’tis so) of my deuice 
In Don Mathias and Lodovicoes deaths: 
If so, ’tis time that it be seene into: 
For she that varies from me in beleefe 
Giues great presumption that she loues me not; 
Or louing, doth dislike of something done:
But who comes here? Oh Ithimore come neere; 
Come neere my loue, come neere thy masters life, 
My trusty seruant, nay, my secondlife; 
For I haue now no hope but eueninthee; 
And on that hope my happinesse is built: 
When saw’st thou Abigall? 

To day. 

With whom?

A Fryar.

A Fryar? false villaine, hehath done the deed. 

How, Sir?

Why made mine Abigall a Nunne.

That’s no lye, for she sent me for him. 

Oh vnhappy day, 
False, credulous, inconstant Abigall! 
Butlet ’em goe: And Ithimore, from hence 
Ne’re shall shegrieue me more with her disgrace; 
Ne’re shall sheliue to inherit ought of mine, 
Be blest of me, nor come within my gates, 
But perish vnderneath my bitter curse 
Like Cain by Adam, for his brother’s death. 

Oh master. 

Ithimore, intreat not for her, I am mou’d, 
And she is hatefull to my soule and me: 
And least thou yeeld to this that I intreat, 
I cannot thinke but that thou hat’st my life. 

Who I, master? Why I’le run to some rocke and 
Throw my selfe headlong into the sea; why I’le doeany 
Thing for your sweet sake. 

Oh trusty Ithimore; no seruant, but my friend; 
I here adopt thee for mineonely heire, 
All that I haueis thine when I am dead, 
And whilst I liue vse helfe; spend as my selfe; 
Here take my keyes, I’le giue ’em thee anon: 
Goe buythee garments: but thoushalt not want: 
Onely know this, that thusthou art to doe: 
But first goe fetch me in the pot of Rice 
That for our supper stands vpon the fire. 

I hold my head my master’s hungry: I goe Sir. 

Exit: 

Thus euery villaine ambles after wealth 
Although he ne’re be richer then in hope: 
But hush’t. 

Enter Ithimore with the pot. 

Here ’tis, Master.

Well said, Ithimore; what hast thou brought 
The Ladle with thee too? 

Yes, Sir, the prouerb saies, he that eats withthe deuil 
Had need of a long spoone, I hauebrought you a Ladle. 

Very well, Ithimore, then now be secret; 
And for thy sake, whom I so dearely loue, 
Now shalt thou see thedeath of Abigall, 
That thou mayst freely liue to be my heire. 

Why, master, wil you poison her with a messe of rice 
Porredge that wil preserue life, makeher round & plump, 
And batten more then you areaware. 

I but Ithimore seest thou this? 
It is a precious powder that I bought Of an Italian in Ancona once, 
Whose operation is to binde, infect, 
And poyson deeply: yet not appeare 
In forty houres after it is tane. 

How master? 

Thus Ithimore: 
This Euen they vse in Malta here (’tis call’d 
Saint Iagues Euen) and then I say they vse 
To send their Almes vnto the Nunneries: 
Among therest beare this, and set it there; 
There’s a darke entry where they take it in,
Where they must neither see the messenger, 
Nor make enquiry who hath sent it them. 

How so? 
Bar. Belike there is some Ceremony in’t. 
There Ithimore must thougoe place this plot: 
Stay, let me spice it first. 

Pray doe, and let me help you Mr. Pray letme taste 

Prethe doe:what saist thou now? (first. 

Troth Mr. I’m loth such a pot of pottage should be 
(spoyld. 

Peace, Ithimore, ’tis betterso then spar’d. 
Assure thy selfe thou shalt hauebroth by the eye. 
My purse, my Coffer, and my selfe is thine. 

Well, master, I goe. 

Stay, first let me stirreit Ithimore. 
As fatall be it to her asthe draught 
Of which great Alexander drunke, and dyed: 
And with her let itworke like Borgias wine, 
Whereof his sire, thePope, was poyson’d. 
In few, the blood of Hydra, Lerna’s bane; 
The iouyceof Hebon, and Cocitus breath, 
And all the poysons of the Stygian poole 
Breake from thefiery kingdome; and in this 
Vomit your venome, and inuenome her 
That like a fiend hathleft her father thus. 

What a blessing has he giu’nt? was euer pot of 
Rice porredge so sauc’t? what shall I doe with it? 

Oh my sweet Ithimore goe set it downe 
And come againe so sooneas thou hast done, 
For I haue other businesse for thee. 

Here’s a drench to poyson a wholestable of 
Flanders mares: I’le carry’t to the Nuns with a powder. 
Bar And the horse pestilence toboot; away. Ith, I am gone. 
Pay me my wages for my worke is done.

Exit.

Ile pay thee with a vengeance Ithamore. 

Exit. 

Enter Govern. Bosco. Knights. Bashaw. 

Welcome great Bashaws, how fares Callymath, 
What wind drives you thus into Malta rhode?

The wind that bloweth all the world besides, 
Desire of gold. 

Desire of gold, great Sir? That’s to be gotten in the Westerne Inde: 
In Malta are no golden Minerals. 

To you of Malta thus saith Calymath: 
The time you tooke for respite, is at hand, 
For the performance of your promise past; 
And for the Tribute­mony I am sent. 

Bashaw, in briefe, shalt haue no tribute here, 
Nor shall the Heathens liue vpon our spoyle: 
First will we race the City wals our selues, 
Lay waste the Iland, hew the Temples downe, 
And shipping of our goods to Sicily, 
Open an entrance for the wastfull sea, 
Whose billowes beating the resistlesse bankes, 
Shall ouerflow it with their refluence. 

Well, Gouernor, since thou hast broke the league 
By flat denyall of the promis’d Tribute, 
Talke not of racing downeyour City wals, 
You shall not need trouble your selues so farre, 
For Selim­Calymath shallcome himselfe,
And with brasse­bullets batterdowne your 
Towers, And turne proud Malta to a wildernesse 
For these intolerable wrongs of yours; And so farewell. 

Farewell: 
And now you men of Malta looke about, 
And let’s prouide to welcome Calymath: 
Close your Port­cullise, charge your 
Basiliskes, And as you profitably take vp Armes, 
So now couragiously encounter them; 
For by this Answer, brokenis the league, 
And nought is to be look’d for now but warres, 
And nought to vs more welcome is then wars.

Exeunt

Enter two Fryars and Abigall. 

Oh brother, brother, all the Nuns aresicke, A
nd Physickewill not helpe them, they must dye.

The Abbasse sent for me to be confest: 
Oh whata sad confession will there be? 

And so did faire Maria send for me: 
I’le to her lodging; hereabouts she lyes. 

Exit. 

Enter Abigall.

What, all deadsaue onely Abigall?

And I shall dye too, for I feele death comming. 
Where is the Fryar that conuerst with me?

Oh he is gone to see the other Nuns. 

I sent for him, but seeing you are come 
Be you my ghostly father; and first know, 
That in this house I liu’dreligiously, 
Chast, and deuout, much sorrowing for my sinnes, 
But e’re I came — 

What then? 

I did offend high heauen so grieuously,
As I am almost desperate for my sinnes: 
And oneoffence torments me more then all. 
You knew Mathias and Don Lodowicke? 

Yes, what of them? 

My fatherdid contract me to ’em both: 
First to Don Lodowicke, him I neuer lou’d; 
Mathias was theman that I held deare, 
And for his sakedid I becomea Nunne. 

So, say how wastheir end? 

Both iealous of my loue, enuied each other: 
And by my father’s practice, which is there 
Set downe at large, the Gallants were both slaine. 

Oh monstrous villany:

To worke my peace, this I confesse to thee: 
Reueale it not, for then my father dyes. 

Know that Confession must not be reueal’d, 
The Canon Law forbids it, and the Priest 
That makes it knowne, being degraded first, 
Shall be condemn’d, and thensent to the fire, 

So I haue heard; pray therefore keepeit close, 
Death seizeth on my heart, ahgentle Fryar 
Conuert my fatherthat he may be sau’d, 
And witnesse that I dyea Christian. 

I, and a Virgin too, that grieues me most: 
But I must to the Iew and exclaime on him, 
And make him stand in feare of me. 

Enter 1 Fryar. 1

Oh brother, all the Nuns are dead, let’s bury them. 

First helpe to bury this, then goe with me 
And helpe me to exclaime against the Iew. 

Why? what has he done?  

A thing that makes me tremble to vnfold.  

What haa he crucified a child?  

No, but a worse thing: ’twas told me in shrift,  

Thou know’st ’tis death and if it be reueal’d. 
Come let’s away.
 
Exeunt. 

Actus Quartus. 

Enter Barabas. Itha. Bells within. 

THere is no musicke to a Christians knell: 
How sweet the Bels ring now the Nunsare dead 
That sound at other times like Tinkers pans? 
I was afraid the poyson had not wrought; 
Or though it wrought, it wouldhaue done no good, 
For euery yeare they swell, and yetthey liue; 
Now allare dead, not one remaines aliue. 

That’s braue, Mr. but think you it wil not beknown 

How can it if we two be secret. 

For my part feare you not. 

I’de cut thy throat if I did.

And reason too; but here’s a royall Monastry hard 
By, good master let me poyson all the Monks.

Thou shalt not need, for now the Nunsare dead, 
They’ll dye with griefe. 

Doe you not sorrow for your daughters death? 

No, but I gr[*]eue because she liu’d so longan Hebrew 
Borne, and would become a Christian. Catho diabola. 

Enter the two Fryars. 

Look, look, Mr. here come two religious Caterpil­

I smelt ’em e’re they came. (lers. 
 
God­a­mercy nose; come let’s begone.

Stay wicked Iew, repent, I say, and stay. 
 
Thou hast offended, therefore must bedamn’d. 

I feare they know we sent thepoyson’d broth

And so doe I, master, therefore speake ’em faire. 

Barabas, thou hast — 

I, that thou hast — 

True, I haue mony, what though I haue? 

Thou art a — 

I, that thou art a —

What needs all this? I know I ama Iew. 

Thy daughter — 

I, thy daughter, —

Oh speake not of her, then I dye with griefe. 

Remember that — 
 
I, remember that — 

I must needs say that I hauebeene a great usurer. 

Thou hast committed — 

Fornication? but that was in another Country: 
And besides, the Wench is dead. 

I, but Barabas remember Mathias and Don Lodowick.

Why, what of them? 

I will not say that by a forged challenge they met. 

She has confest, and we are both vndone; 
My bosome inmates, but I must dissemble. aside. 
Oh holy Fryars, the burthen of my sinnes 
Lye heauy on my soule; thenpray you tell me, 
Is’t not too late now to turne Christian? 
I haue beene zealous in the Iewish faith, 
Hard harted tothe poore, a couetous wretch, 
That would for Lucars sake haue sold my soule. 
A hundred for a hundred I haue tane; 
And now for store of wealth mayI compare 
With all the Iewes in Malta; but what is wealth? 
I am a Iew, and therefore am I lost. 
Would pennance serue for this my sinne, 
I could afford to whip my selfe to death. 

And so could I; but pennance will not serue. 

To fast, to pray, and weare a shirtof haire, 
And on my knees creepe to Ierusalem, 
Cellers of Wine, and Sollers full of Wheat, 
Ware­houses stuft with spices and with drugs, 
Whole Chests of Gold, in Bulloine, and in Coyne, 
Besides I know not how much weight in Pearle 
Orient and round, haue I within my house; 
At Alexandria, Merchandize vnsold: 
But yesterday two ships went from this Towne, 
Their voyage will beworth ten thousand Crownes. 
In Florence, Venice, Antwerpe, London, Ciuill, 
Frankeford, Lubecke, Mosco, and wherenot, 
Haue I debts owing; and in most ofthese, 
Great summes ofmony lying in the bancho; 
All this I’le giue to some religious house 
So I may be baptiz’d and liue therein. 

Oh good Barabas come to our house. 

Oh no, good Barabas come to our house. 
And Barabas, you know — 

I know that I haue highly sinn’d, 
You shall conuert me, you shall haue all my wealth. 

Oh Barabas, their Lawes are strict. 

I know they are, and I will be with you. 

They weare no shirts, and they goe bare­foot too. 

Then ’tis not for me; and I amresolu’d 
You shall confesse me, and haue all my goods. 

Good Barabas come to me.

You see I answer him, and yet he stayes; 
Rid himaway, and goe youhome with me. 

I’le be with you to night.  

Come to my house at one a clocke this night.  

You heare your answer, and you may be gone.  

Why goe get you away.  

I will not goe for thee.  

Not, then I’le make thee goe.  

How, dost call me rogue? 

Fight.  

Part ’em, master, part ’em.  

This is meere frailty, brethren, be content.  
Fryar Barnardine goe you with Ithimore.  

You know my mind, let me alone with him;  
Why does he goe to thy house, let him begone.  

I’le giue him something and so stop his mouth.  

Exit.  

I neuer heard of any man but he  
Malign’d the order of the Iacobines:  
But doe you thinke that I beleeue his words?  
Why Brother you conuerted Abigall;  
And I am bound in charitie to requite it,  
And so I will, oh Iocome, faile not but come.  

But Barabas who shall be your godfathers,  
For presently you shall be shriu’d.  

Marry the Turke shall be one of my godfathers,  
But not a word to any of your Couent.  

I warrant thee, Barabas.  

Exit  

So now the feare is past, and I am safe:  
For he that shriu’d her is within my house,  
What if I murder’d him e’re Iocoma comes?  
Now I haue such a plot for both their liues,  
As neuer Iew nor Christian knew the like:  
One turn’d my daughter, therefore he shall dye;  
The other knowes enough to haue my life,  
Therefore ’tis not requisite he should liue.  
But are not both these wise men to suppose  
That I will leaue my house, my goods, and all,  
To fast and be well whipt; I’le none of that.  
Now Fryar Bernardine I come to you,  
I’le feast you, lodge you, giue you faire words, 
And after that, I and my trusty Turke — 
No more but so: itmust and shall be done. 
Ithimore, tellme, is the Fryar asleepe? 

Enter Ithimore. 

Yes; and I know not what the reason is. 
Doe what I can he will not strip himselfe, 
Nor goe to bed, but sleepesinhis owne clothes; 
I feare me he mistrusts what we intend. 

No, ’tis an order which the Fryars vse: 
Yet if he knew our meanings, could he scape? 

No, none can heare him, cry he ne’re so loud.

Why true, therefore did I place him there: 
The other Chambers open towards the street. 

You loyter, master, wherefore stay we thus? 
Oh how I longto see himshake his heeles. 

Come on, sirra, off with your girdle, make a hansom 
Fryar awake. (noose; 

What doe you meane to strangle me?

Yes, ’cause you vse to confesse. 

Blame not vs but theprouerb, Confes &be hang’d 
Pull hard.

What, will you saue my life? 

Pull hard, I say, you would haue had my goods. 

I, and our liues too. therefore pull amaine. 
’Tis neatly done, Sir, here’s no printat all. 

Then is it as it should be, take him vp. 

Nay, Mr. be rul’d by mea little; so, let him leane 
Vpon his staffe; excellent, he stands as if hewere begging (of Bacon. 

Whowould not thinke but that this Fryar liu’d? 
What time a night is’t now, sweet Ithimore? 

Towards one. 

Enter Iocoma. 

Then will not Iocoma be long from hence. 

This is the houre wherein I shall proceed; 
Oh happy houre, wherein I shall conuert 
An Infidell, and bring his gold into our treasury. 
But soft, is not this Bernardine? it is; 
And vnderstandingI should come this way, 
Stands here a purpose, meaning me some wrong, 
And intercept my going to the Iew; Bernardine; 
Wilt thou not speake? thou think’stI see thee not; 
Away, I’de wish thee, and let me goe by: 
No, wilt thou not? nay thenI’le force my way; 
And see, a staffe stands ready for thepurpose: 
As thou lik’st that, stop me another time.
 
Strike him, he fals. Enter Barabas. 

Why how now Iocoma, what hast thou done? 

Why stricken him that wouldhaue stroke at me. 

Whois it Bernardine? now out alas, he is slaine.

I, Mr. he’s slain; look how his brains drop out on’s 
(nose. 

Good sirsI haue don’t, but nobody knowes it but 
You two, I may escape.

So might my man and I hang with you for com­

No,let vs beare him to the Magistrates. (pany. 

Good Barabas let me goe. 

No, pardon me, the Law must haue his course. 
I must be forc’d to giue in euidence, 
That being importun’d by this Bernardine 
To be a Christian, I shut him out, 
And there hesate: now I to keepemy word, 
And giue my goods and substance to your house, 
Was vp thus early; with intent to goe 
Vnto your Friery, because you staid. 

Fie vpon ’em, Mr. will you turne Christian, when 
Holy Friars turne deuils and murderone another. 

No, for this exampleI’le remainea Iew: 
Heauen blesse me; what, a Fryar a murderer? 
When shall you see a Iew committhe like? 

Why a Turke could ha done no more. 

To morrow is the Sessions; you shall to it. 
Come Ithimore, let’s helpe to take him hence. 

Villaines, I am a sacred person, touch me not. 

The Law shall touch you, we’ll but lead you, we. 
’Las I could weepe at your calamity. 
Take in the staffe too, for that must be showne: 
Law wils that each particular be knowne. 

Exeunt. 

Enter Curtezant, and Pilia­borza.

Pilia­borza, didst thou meet with Ithimore?

I did.

And didst thoudeliuer my letter? 

I did. 

And what think’st thou, will he come? 

I think so, and yet I cannot tell, for at the reading of 
The letter, he look’d like a man of another world.

Why so? Pil. That such a base slaue as he should besaluted by such 
A tall manas I am, from such a beautifull dame as you.

And what said he? 

Not a wise word, only gaue me a nod, as who shold 
say, Is it euen so; and so I left him,being driuen to a 
Non­plus at the critical aspect ofmy terrible countenance. 

And where didst meethim? 

Vpon mine owne free­hold within 40 foot of the 
Gallowes, conning his neck­verse I take it, looking of a 
Fryars Execution, whom I saluted with an old hempen 
prouerb, Hidie tibi, cras mihi, and so I left him to the mercy 
Of the Hangman: but theExercise being done, see where He comes. 

Enter Ithimore. 

I neuer knew a man take his death so patiently as 
This Fryar; he was ready to leape off e’re the halter was 
About his necke; and when the Hangman had put on his 
Hempen Tippet, hemade such haste to his prayers, as if 
Hee had had another Cure to serue; well, goe whither 
He will, I’le be none of his followers in haste: 
And now I thinke on’t, going to theexecution, a fellow 
Met me with a muschatoes like a Rauenswing, and 
A Dagger with a hilt like a warming­pan, and he 
Gaue me a letter from one Madam Bellamira, 
Saluting me in such sort as if he had meant to make 
Cleane my Boots withhis lips; the effect was, that 
I should come to her house, I wonder what the reason is; 
It may be she sees more in me than I can find in 
My selfe: for she writes further, that she loues me 
Euer since she saw me, and who would not requite such 
Loue? here’s her house, andhereshe comes, and now 
Would I were gone, I am not worthy to looke vpon her. 

This is the Gentleman you writ to. 

Gentleman, he flouts me, what gentry can bein a 
Poore Turke of ten pence? I’le be gone.

Is’t not a sweet fac’d youth, Pilia? 

Agen, sweet youth; did not you, Sir, bring thesweet 
Youth a letter?

I did Sir, and from this Gentlewoman, who as my 
Selfe, & the rest of the family, stand or fall at your seruice. 

Though womans modesty should hale mebacke, 
I can with­hold no longer; welcome sweet loue.

Now am I cleane, or rather fouly out of the way. 

Whither so soone? 

I’le goe stealesome mony from my Master to 
Make mehansome: 
Pray pardon me, I must goesee a ship discharg’d. 

Canst thou beso vnkindtoleaue me thus? 

And ye did but know how she loues you, Sir. 

Nay, I care not how much she loues me; 
Sweet Allamira, would I had my Masters wealth for thy 
(sake: 

And you can haue it, Sir, and if you please. 

If ’twere aboue ground I could, and wouldhaue it; 
But hee hides and buries it vp asPartridges doe 
Their egges, vnder the earth. 

And is’t not possible to find it out? I

By no meanes possible. 

What shall we doe with this base villaine then? 

Let me alone, doe but you speake him faire: 
But you know some secrets of the Iew, which if they were 
Reueal’d, would doe him harme. 

I, and such as — Goe to, no more, 
I’le make him send me half he has, & glad he scapes so too. 
Pen and Inke: 
I’le write vnto him, we’le hauemony strait. 

Send for a hundred Crownes at least. 

He writes. 

Ten hundred thousand crownes, — Mr. Barabas.

Write not so submissiuely, but threatning him.

Sirra Barabas, send me a hundred crownes.

Put in two hundred at least. 

I charge thee send me 300 by this bearer, and this 
Shall be your warrant; if you doe not, no more but so. 

Tell him you will confesse. 

Otherwise I’le confesseall, vanish and returne in a 
Twinckle.

Let me alone, I’le vse him in his kinde.

Hang him Iew. 

Now, gentle Ithimore, lye in my lap. 
Whereare my Maids? prouide a running Banquet; 
Send to the Merchant, bid him bring me silkes, 
Shall Ithimore my loue goe in such rags? 

And bid the Ieweller come hither too. 

I haue no husband, sweet, I’le marry thee.

Content, but we will leaue this paltry land, 
And saile from hence to Greece, to louely Greece, 
I’le be thy Iason, thou my goldenFleece; 
Where painted Carpets o’re the meads are hurl’d, 
And Bacchus vineyards ore­spread the world: 
Where Woods and Forrests goe in goodly greene, 
I’le be Adonis, thou shalt be Loues Queene. 
The Meads, the Orchards, and the Primrose lanes, 
Instead of Sedge and Reed, beare Sugar Canes: 
Thou in those Groues, by Dis aboue, 
Shalt liue withme and bemy loue. 

Whiiher will I not goe with gentle Ithimore?

Enter Pilea­borza. 

How now? hast thou thegold? 

Yes. (freely? 

But came it freely, did the Cow giue down her milk 

At reading of the letter, he star’d & stamp’d, & turnd 
Aside, I tooke himby the sterd, & look’d vpon him thus; 
Told him he were best to send it, then he hug’d & imbrac’d 

Rather for feare then loue. (me. 

Then like a Iew he laugh’d & jeer’d, and told me he 
lou’d me for your sake, & said what a faithfull seruant you 

The more villaine he to keep me thus: (had bin. 
Here’s goodly parrell, isthere not?

To conclude, he gaue me ten crownes.

But ten? I’le not leaue him worth a gray groat, giue 
Me a Reame of paper, we’ll haue a kingdome of gold for’t. 

Write for 500 Crownes.

Sirra Iew, as you loueyour life send me 500 crowns, 
And giuethe Bearer 100. Tell him I must hau’t.

I warrant your worship shall hau’t. 

And if he aske why I demand so much, tell him, 
I scornetowrite a line vnder a hundred crownes. 

You’d makea rich Poet, Sir. I amgone. 

Exit. 

Take thou the mony, spend it for my sake.

’Tis not thy mony, but thy selfe I weigh: 
Thus Bellamira esteemes of gold; But thus of thee. 

— Kisse him. — 

That kisse againe; she runs diuision of my lips. 
What an eye she casts on me? 
It twinckles like a Starre. 

Come my deare loue, let’s in and sleepe together. 

Oh that ten thousand nights wereput inone, 
That wee might sleepe seuen yeeres together afore 
We wake. 

Come Amorous wag, first banquetand then sleep. 

Enter Barabas reading a letter.

Barabas send me 300 Crownes. 
Plaine Barabas: oh that wicked Curtezane! 
He was not wont to call me Barabas. 
Or else I will confesse: I, there it goes: 
But if I get him Coupe de Gorge, for that 
He sent a shaggy totter’d staring slaue, 
That when hespeakes, drawes out his grisly beard, 
And winds it twice or thrice about his eare; 
Whose face has bin a grind­stone for mens swords, 
His hands arehackt, some fingers cut quite off; 
Who when he speakes, grunts like a hog, and looks 
Like one that is imploy’d in Catzerie, 
And crosbiting such a Rogue
As is the husband to a hundred whores: 
And I by him must send three hundred crownes. 
Well, my hope is, he will not stay there still; 
And when he comes: Oh that hewere but here! 

Enter Pilia­borza. 

Iew, I must ha more gold.

Why wantst thou any of thy tale? 

No; but 300 will not serue his turne. 

Not serue his turne, Sir? 

No Sir; and therefore I must haue 500 more.

I’le rather — 

Oh good words, Sir, and send it you were best; see, 
There’s his letter. 

Might he not as well come as send; pray bid him 
Come & fetch it, whathee writes for you, ye shall haue 

I,and the rest too,or else — (streight. 

I must make this villaine away: please you dine 
With me, Sir, & you shal be most hartily poyson’d. 

aside 

No god­a­mercy, shall I haue these crownes?

I cannot doe it, I haue lostmy keyes. 

Oh, if that be all, I can picke ope your locks. 

Or climbe vp to my Counting­house window: 
You know my meaning.

I know enough, and therfore talke not tome of your 
Counting­house, the gold, or know Iew it is in my power 

I am betraid. (to hang thee.
’Tis not 500 Crownes that I esteeme,  
I am not mou’d at that: this angers me,  
That he who knowes I loue him as my selfe  
Should write in this imperious vaine? why Sir,  
You know I haue no childe, and vnto whom  
Should I leaue all but vnto Ithimore?  

Here’s many words but no crownes; the crownes.  
Bar. Commend me to him, Sir, most humbly,  
And vnto your good mistris as vnknowne.  

Speake, shall I haue ’vm, Sir?  

Sir here they are.  
Oh that I should part with so much gold!  
Here take ’em, fellow, with as good a will —  
— As I wud see thee hang’d; oh, loue stops my breath:  
Neuer lou’d man seruant as I doe Ithimore.  

I know it, Sir.  

Pray when, Sir, shall I see you at my house?  

Soone enough to your cost, Sir:  
Fare you well.  

Exit.  

Nay to thine owne cost, villaine, if thou com’st.  
Was euer Iew tormented as I am?  
To haue a shag­rag knaue to come  
300 Crownes, and then 500 Crownes?  
Well, I must seeke a meanes to rid ’em all,  
And presently: for in his villany  
He will tell all he knowes and I shall dye for’t. I haue it.  
I will in some disguize goe see the slaue,  
And how the villaine reuels with my gold.  

Exit.  

Enter Curtezane. Ithimore. Pilia­borza. 
 
I’le pledge thee, loue, and therefore drinke it off.  

Saist thou me so? haue at it; and doe you heare?  

Goe to, it shall be so.  

Of that condition I wil drink it vp; here’s to thee.  

Nay, I’le haue all or none.  

There, if thou lou’st me doe not leaue a drop.  

Loue thee, fill me three glasses.  

Three and fifty dozen, I’le pledge thee,  

Knauely spoke, and like a Knight at Armes. 

Hey Riuo Castiliano, a man’s a man. 

Now to the Iew. 

Ha to the Iew, and send me mony youwere best. 

What wudst thou doe if he should send thee none? 

Doe nothing; but I know what I know, 
He’s a murderer. 

I had not thought hehad been so braue a man.

You knew Mathias and the Gouernors son, he and 
I kild ’em both, and yet neuer touch’d ’em. 

Oh brauely done.

I carried the broth that poyson’d theNuns, and he 
And I snicle handtoo fast, strangled a Fryar.

You two alone. 

We two, and ’twas neuer knowne, nor neuer shall 
Be for me. 

This shall with me vnto the Gouernor. 

And fit it should: but first let’s ha more gold: 
Come gentle Ithimore, lye in my lap.

Loue me little, loue me long, let musicke rumble, 
Whilst I in thy incoomy lapdoe tumble. 

Enter Barabas with a Lute, disguis’d.

A French Musician, come let’s heare your skill? 

Must tuna my Lute for sound, twang twang first. 

Wilt drinke French­man, here’s to thee with a — 
Pox on this drunken hick­vp. 

Gramercy Mounsier.

Prethe, Pilia­borza, bid the Fidler giue me 
The posey in his hat there. 

Sirra, you must giue my mistris your posey.

A voustre commandemente Madam.

How sweet, my Ithimore, the flowers smell.

Like thy breath, sweet­hart, no violet like ’em. 

Foh, me thinkes they stinke like a Holly­Hoke. 

So, now I amreueng’d vpon ’em all. 
The scent thereof was death, I poyson’d it. 

Play, Fidler, or I’le cut your cats gutsinto chitterlins 

Pardona moy, be no in tune yet; so now, now all be in.

Giue him a crowne, and fill me out more wine. 

There’s two crownes for thee, play. 

How liberally the villain giues me mine own gold. 

aside. 

Me thinkes he fingers very well.

So did you when you stole my gold. 

aside 

How swift he runnes. 

You run swifter when you threw my gold out of 
My Window. 

aside. 

Musician, hast beene in Malta long? 

Two, three, foure month Madam. 

Dost not know a Iew, one Barabas?

Very mush, Mounsier, you no behis man. 

His man? 

I scorne thePeasant, tell him so. 

He knowes it already.

’Tis a strange thing of that Iew, he liues vpon 
Pickled Grashoppers, and sauc’d Mushrumbs. 

What a slaue’s this? 
The Gouernour feeds not as I doe. 

aside.

He neuer put on cleane shirt since he was circumcis’d 

Oh raskall! I changemy selfe twice a day.

aside 

The Hat he weares, Iudas leftvnder the Elder 
When he hang’d himselfe. 

’Twas sent mefor a present from the great Cham. 

aside 

Amasty slauehe is; 
Whether now, Fidler? 

Pardona moy, Mounsier, we be no well.

Exit.

Farewell Fidler: One letter moreto the 

Prethe sweet loue, one more, and write it sharp. 

No, I’le send by word of mouth now; 
Bid him deliuer thee a thousand Crownes, by the same 
Token, that the Nuns lou’d Rice, that Fryar Bernardine 
Slept in his owne clothes, 
Any of ’em will doe it. 

Let me alone to vrge it now I know themeaning. 

The meaning has a meaning; comelet’s in: 
To vndoe a Iew is charity, and not sinne. 

Exeunt. 

Actus Quintus. 

Enter Gouernor. Knights. Martin Del­Bosco. 

NOw, Gentlemen, betake you to your Armes, 
And see that Malta be well fortifi’d; 
And it behoues you to be resolute; 
For Calymath hauing houer’d here so long, 
Will winne the Towne, ordye before the wals. 

And dye he shall, for we will neuer yeeld. 

Enter Curtezane, Pilia­borza. 

Oh bring vs tothe Gouernor.

Awaywith her, she is a Curtezane.  

What e’re I am, yet Gouernor heare me speake; 
I bring thee newes by whom thy sonne was slaine: 
Mathias did it not, it was the Iew. 

Who, besides the slaughter of these Gentlemen, 
Poyson’d his owne daughterand the Nuns, 
Strangled a Fryar, and I know not what 
Mischiefe beside. 

Had we but proofe of this. 

Strong proofe, my Lord, his man’s now at my 
Lodging that was his Agent, he’ll confesse it all. 

Goefetch him straight, I alwayes fear’d that Iew.
 
Enter Iew, Ithimore. 

I’le goe alone, dogs do not hale me thus. (my belly. 

Nor me neither, I cannot out­run you Constable, oh 

One dram of powder more had made all sure, 
What a damn’d slaue was I? 

Make fires, heat irons, let the racke be fetch’d. 

Nay stay, my Lord, ’tmay be he will confesse. 

Confesse; whatmeane you, Lords, who should 
(confesse? 

Thou and thy Turk; ’twas you that slew my son.

Gilty, my Lord, I confesse; your sonne and Mathias 
Were both contracted vnto Abigall, 
Forg’d a counterfeit challenge.

Who carried that challenge? 

I carried it, I confesse, but who writ it? 
Marry euen he that strangled Bernardine, poyson’d the 
Nuns, and his owne daughter.

Away with him, his sight is death to me. 

For what, youmen of Malta, heare me speake; 
Shee is a Curtezane and he a theefe, 
And he my bondman, let me haue law, 
For none of this can preiudice my life: 

Once more away with him; you shall haue law. 

Deuils doe your worst, I liue in spite of you. 
As these haue spoke so be it to their soules: 
I hope the poyson’d flowers will worke anon. 

Exit. 

Enter Mater. 

Was my Mathias murder’d by the Iew?

’twas thy sonne that murder’d him.

Be patient, gentle Madam, it was he, 
He forged the daring challenge made them fight. 

Where is the Iew, where is that murderer? 

Inprison till the Law has past on him. 

Enter Officer. 

My Lord, theCurtezane and her man are dead; 
So is the Turke, and Barabas the Iew.

Dead? 

Dead, my Lord, and here they bring his body.

This sudden death of his is very strange. 

Wonder not at it, Sir, theheauens are iust: 
Their deaths were like their liues, then thinknot of ’em 
Since they are dead, let them be buried. 
For the Iewes body, throw that o’re the wals, 
To be a prey for Vultures and wildbeasts. 
So, now away and fortifie the Towne. 

Exeunt.

What, all alone? well fare sleepy drinke. 
I’le bereueng’d on this accursed Towne; 
For by my meanes Calymath shall enter in. 
I’le helpe to slay their children and their wiues, 
To fire the Churches, pull their houses downe, 
Take my goods too, and seizevpon my lands: 
I hope to see the Gouernour a slaue, 
And, rowing in a Gally, whipt to death. 

Enter Calymath, Bashawes, Turkes. 

Whom haue we there, a spy?

Yes, my good Lord, one that can spy a place 
Where you may enter, and surprize the Towne:
 My name is Barabas; I ama Iew. 
 
Art thou that Iew whose goods we heard were sold 
For Tribute­mony? 

The very same, my Lord: 
And since that time they haue hir’d a slaue my man 
To accuse me of a thousand villanies: 
I was imprison’d, but scap’d their hands. 

Didst breake prison? 

No, no: I dranke of Poppy and cold mandrake juyce; 
And being asleepe, belike they thought me dead, 
And threw me o’re the wals: so, or how else, 
The Iew is here, and rests atyour command. 

’Twas brauely done: but tell me, Barabas, '
Canst thou, as thou reportest, make Malta ours? 

Feare not, my Lord, for here against the Truce, 
The rocke ishollow, and of purpose digg’d,
To make a passage for the running streames 
And common channels of the City. 
Now whilst you giue assault vnto the wals, 
I’le lead 500 souldiersthrough the Vault, 
And rise with them i’th middleof the Towne, 
Open the gates for you to enter in, 
And by this meanes the City is your owne. 

If this be true, I’le make thee Gouernor. 

And if it be not true, then let me dye. 

Thou’st doom’d thy selfe, assault it presently.

Exeunt. 

Alarmes. Enter Turkes, Barabas, Gouernour, 
and Knights prisoners. 

Now vaile your pride you captiue Christians,  
And kneele for mercy to your conquering foe: 
Now where’s thehope you had of haughty Spaine? 
Ferneze, speake, had it not beene much better 
To kept thy promise thenbe thus surpriz’d? 

What should I say, we arecaptiues and must yeeld. 

I, villains, you must yeeld, and vnder Turkish yokes 
Shall groning beare the burthen of our ire; 
And Barabas, as erst we promis’d thee, 
For thy desert we make the Gouernor, 
Vse themat thy discretion. 

Thankes, my Lord. 

Oh fatall day to fall into the hands Of such a 
Traitor and vnhallowed Iew! 
What greater misery could heauen inflict? 

’Tis our command: and Barabas, we giue 
To guard thy person, these our Ianizaries: 
Intreat them well, as we haue vsed thee. 
And now, braue Bashawes, come, wee’ll walke about 
The ruin’d Towne, and see the wracke we made: 
Farewell braue Iew, farewell great Barabas. 

Exeunt.

May all good fortune follow Calymath. 
And now, as entrance to our safety, 
To prison with the Gouernour and these 
Captaines, his consortsand confederates. 

Oh villaine, Heauen will be reueng’d on thee. 

Exeunt.

Away, no more, lethim not trouble me. 
Thus hast thou gotten, by thy policie, 
No simple place, no small authority, 
I now am Gouernour of Malta; true, 
But Malta hates me, and in hating me 
My life’s in danger, and what boots it thee 
Poore Barabas, to be the Gouernour, 
When as thy life shall be at their command? 
No, Barabas, this must be look’d into; 
And since by wrong thou got’st Authority, 
Maintaine it brauely by firme policy, 
At least vnprofitably lose it not: 
For he that liueth in Authority, 
And neither gets him friends, nor fils his bags, 
Liues like the Asse that Æsope speaketh of, 
That labours witha load of bread and wine, 
And leaues it off to snap on Thistletops: 
But Barabas will be morecircumspect. 
Begin betimes, Occasion’s bald behind, 
Slip not thine oportunity, for feare too late 
Thou seek’st for much, but canstnot compasseit 
Within here. 

Enter Gouernor with a guard. 

My Lord? 

I, Lord, thus slaues will learne. 
Now Gouernor stand by there, wait within, 
This is the reason that I sent for thee; 
Thou seest thy life, and Malta’s happinesse, 
Are at my Arbitrament; and Barabas 
At his discretion may dispose of both: 
Now tell me, Gouernor, and plainely too, 
What thinkst thou shall become of it and thee? 

This; Barabas, since things are in thy power, 
I see no reason but of Malta’s wracke, 
Nor hope of thee but extreme cruelty, 
Nor feare I death, nor will I flatter thee. 

Gouernor, good words, be not so furious; 
’Tis not thy life which can availe me ought, 
Yet you doe liue, and liue for me you shall: 
And as for Malta’s ruine, thinke you not 
’Twere slender policy for Barabas 
To dispossesse himselfe of such a place? 
For sith, as once you said, within this Ile 
In Malta here, that I haue got my goods, 
And in this City still haue had successe, 
And now at length am growne your Governor, 
Your selues shall see it shallnot be forgot: 
For as a friend not knowne, but in distresse, 
I’le reare vp Malta now remedilesse. 

Will Barabas recouer Malta’s losse? 
Will Barabas be good toChristians? 

What wilt thou giue me, Gouernor, to procure 
A dissolution of the slauish Bands 
Wherein the Turke hath yoak’d your land and you? 
What will you giue me if I render you 
The life of Calymath, surprize his men, 
And in an out­house ofthe City shut 
His souldiers, till I haue consum’d ’em all with fire? 
What will you giue him that procureth this? 

Doe but bring this to passe which thou pretendest, 
Deale truly with vs as thou intimatest, 
And I will send amongst the Citizens 
And by my letters priuately procure 
Great summes ofmony for thy recompence: 
Nay more, doe this, and liue thou Gouernor still. 

Nay, doe thou this, Ferneze, and be free; Gouernor, 
I enlarge thee, liue with me, 
Goe walke about the City, see thy friends: 
Tush, send not letters to ’em, goe thy selfe, 
And let mesee what mony thou canst make; 
Here is my hand that I’le set Malta free: 
And thus we cast it: Toa solemne feast 
I will inuite young Selim­Calymath, 
Where be thou present onely to performe 
One stratagem that I’le impart to thee, 
Wherein no danger shall betide thy life, 
And I will warrant Malta free for euer. 

Here is my hand, beleeue me, Barabas, 
I will be there, and doe as thou desirest; 
When is the time? Bar. Gouernor, presently. 
For Callymath, when he hath view’d the Towne, 
Will take his leaue and saile toward, Ottoman, 

Then will I, Barabas, about this coyne, 
And bring it withme to thee in the euening. 

Doe so, but faile not; now farewell Ferneze: 
And thus farre roundly goes the businesse: 
Thus louing neither, will I liue with both, 
Making a profit of my policie; 
And he from whom my most aduantagecomes, 
Shall be my friend. 
This is thelife we Iewes are vs’d to lead; 
And reason too, for Christians doe the like: 
Well, now about effecting this deuice: 
First to surprize great Selims souldiers, 
And then to make prouision for thefeast, 
That at one instant all things may be done, 
My policie detests preuention: 
To what euent my secret purpose driues, 
I know; and they shallwitnesse withtheir liues. 

Exit.

Enter Calymath, Bashawes.

Thus haue we view’d the City, seene the sacke, 
And caus’d theruines to be new repair’d, 
Which with our Bombards shot and Basiliske, 
We rent in sunder at our entry: 
And now I see the Scituation, 
And how secure this conquer’d Ilandstands 
Inuiron’d with the mediterraneanSea, 
Strong contermin’d with other petty Iles; 
And toward Calabria back’d by Sicily, 
Two lofty Turrets that commandthe Towne. 
When Siracusian Dionisius reign’d; 
I wonder how it could be conquer’d thus? 

Enter a messenger.  

From Barabas, Malta’s Gouernor, I bring  
A message vnto mighty Calymath;  
Hearing his Soueraigne was bound for Sea,  
To saile to Turkey, to great Ottamon,  
He humbly would intreat your Maiesty  
To come and see his homely Citadell,  
And banquet with him e’re thou leau’st the Ile.  

To banquet with him in his Citadell,  
I feare me, Messenger, to feast my traine  
Within a Towne of warre so lately pillag’d,  
Will be too costly and too troublesome:  
Yet would I gladly visit Barabas.  
For well has Barabas deseru’d of vs.  

Selim, for that, thus saith the Gouernor,  
That he hath in store a Pearle so big,  
So precious, and withall so orient,  
As be it valued but indifferently,  
The price thereof will serue to entertaine  
Selim and all his souldiers for a month;  
Therefore he humbly would intreat your Highnesse  
Not to depart till he has feasted you.  

I cannot feast my men in Malta wals,  
Except he place his Tables in the streets.  

Know, Selim, that there is a monastery  
Which standeth as an out­house to the Towne;  
There will he banquet them, but thee at home,  
With all thy Bashawes and braue followers.  

Well, tell the Gouernor we grant his suit,  
Wee’ll in this Summer Euening feast with him.  

I shall, my Lord,  

Exit.  

And now, bold Bashawes, let vs to our Tents,  
And meditate how we may grace vs best  
To solemnize our Gouernors great feast.  

Exeunt.  

Enter Gouernor, Knights, Del­bosco. 

In this, my Countrimen, be rul’d by me,  
Haue speciall care that no man sally forth   
Till you shall heare a Culuerin discharg’d 
By him that beares the Linstocke, kindled thus; 
Then issue out and come to rescue me, 
For happily I shall be in distresse, 
Or you releasedof this seruitude. 

Rather then thus to liue as Turkish thrals, 
What will we not aduenture?

On then, begone.

Farewell graue Gouernor. 

Enter with a Hammar aboue, very busie.

How stand the cords? How hang these hinges, fast? 
Are all the Cranesand Pulleyes sure? 

All fast.

Leaue nothing loose, all leueld to my mind. 
Why now I see that you haue Art indeed. 
There, Carpenters, diuide that gold amongst you: 
Goe swill in bowles of Sacke and Muscadine: 
Downe to the Celler, taste of all my wines. 

We shall, my Lord, and thanke you:
 
Exeunt.

And if you like them, drinke your filland dye: 
For so I liue, perishmay all the world.
Now Selim­Calymath returneme word 
That thou wilt come, and I am satisfied. 
Now sirra, what, will he come? 

Enter Messenger. 

He will; and has commanded all his men
To come ashore, and march through Malta streets, 
That thou maist feast them in thy Citadell. 

Then now are all things asmy wish wud haue ’em, 
There wanteth nothing but the Gouernors pelfe, 
And see hebrings it: Now, Gouernor, the summe. 

Enter Gouernour. 

With free consent a hundred thousand pounds.

Pounds saist thou, Gouernor, wel since it is no more 
I’le satisfie my selfe withthat; nay, keepe it still, 
For if I keepe not promise, trust not me. 
And Gouernour, now partake my policy: 
First for his Army, they are sent before, 
Enter’d the Monastery, and vnderneath 
In seuerall places are field­pieces pitch’d, 
Bombards, whole Barrels full of Gunpowder, 
That on the sudden shall disseuer it, 
And batterall the stones about their eares, 
Whence none can possibly escape aliue: 
Now as for Calymath and his consorts, 
Here haue I made a dainty Gallery, 
The floore whereof, this Cable being cut, 
Doth fall asunder; so that itdoth sinke 
Into a deepepitpast recouery. 
Here, hold that knife, and when thou seest he comes, 
And with his Bashawes shallbe blithely set, 
A warning­peece shall be shot off from the Tower, 
To giue thee knowledgewhen to cut the cord, 
And fire the house; say, will not this be braue? 

Oh excellent! here, hold thee, Barabas, 
I trust thy word, take what I promis’d thee. 

No, Gouernor, I’le satisfie thee first, 
Thou shalt not liue in doubt of any thing. 
Stand close, for here they come: why, isnot this 
A kingly kinde of trade to purchase Townes 
By treachery, and sell ’em by deceit? 
Now tell me, worldlings, vnderneath the summe, 
If greater falshood euer has bin done. 

Enter Calymath and Bashawes. 

Come, my Companion­Bashawes, see I pray 
How busie Barrabas is there aboue 
To entertaine vs in his Gallery; 
Let vs salute him, Sauethee, Barabas. 

Welcome great Calymath.

How the slaue jeeres at him? 

Will’t please thee, mighty Selim­Calymath, 
To ascend our homelystayres? 

I, Barabas, come Bashawes, attend. G

Stay, Calymath; 
For I will shew thee greater curtesie 
Then Barabas would haue affoorded thee. 

Sound a charge there. 

{A charge, the cable cut, 
A Caldron discouered

How now, what means this 

Helpe, helpeme, Christians, helpe.

See Calymath, this was deuis’d for thee. 

Treason, treason Bashawes, flye. 

No, Selim, doe not flye; 
See his end first, and flye then if thou canst. 

Oh helpe me, Selim, helpe me, Christians. 
Gouernour, why stand you all so pittilesse? 

Should I in pitty of thy plaints orthee, 
Accursed Barabas; base Iew relent: 
No, thus I’le see thy treachery repaid, 
But wish thou hadst behau’d thee otherwise. 

You will not helpe me then?

No, villaine, no. 

And villaines, know you cannot helpe me now. 
Then Barabas breath forth thy latest fate, 
And in thefury of thy torments, striue 
To end thy lifewith resolution: 
Know, Gouernor, ’twas I that slew thy sonne; 
I fram’d the challenge that did makethem meet: 
Know, Calymath, I aym’d thy ouerthrow, 
And had I but escap’d this stratagem, 
I would haue brought confusion on youall, 
Damn’d Christians, dogges, and Turkish Infidels;
But now begins the extremity of heat 
To pinch me with intolerable pangs: 
Dye life, flye soule, tongue curse thy filland dye: 

Tell me, you Christians, what doth this portend? 

This traine he laid to haueintrap’d thy life; 
Now Selim note the vnhallowed deeds of Iewes: 
Thus he determin’d to haue handled thee, 
But I hauerather chose to sauethy life. 

Was this thebanquet he prepar’d for vs? 
Let’s hence, lest further mischiefe be pretended. 

Nay, Selim, stay, for sincewe hauethee here, 
We will not let thee part so suddenly: 
Besides, if we should let thee goe, all’s one, 
For with thy Gallyes couldst thou not get hence, 
Without fresh men torigge and furnish them. 

Tush, Gouernor, take thou no care for that, 
My men are all aboord, 
And doe attend my comming there by this. 

Why hardst thou not thetrumpetsound a charge?

Yes, what of that? 

Why then the house was fir’d, 
Blowne vp, and allthy souldiers massacred.

Oh monstrous treason! 

A Iewes curtesie: 
For he that did by treason worke our fall, 
By treason hath deliuered thee tovs: 
Know therefore, till thy father hath made good 
The ruines done to Malta and to vs, 
Thou canst not part: for Malta shall be freed, 
Or Selim ne’re returne to Ottamen. 

Nay rather, Christians, let me goe to Turkey, 
In person there to meditate your peace; 
To keepe me here will nought aduantage you. 

Content thee, Calymath, here thou must stay, 
And liue in Malta prisoner; for comecall the world 
To rescue thee, so will we guard vs now 
No sooner shall they drinke the Ocean dry, 
Then conquer Malta, or endanger vs. 
So march away, and letdue praise be giuen 
Neither to Fate nor Fottune, but to Heauen. 

FINIS. 
