
THE SECOND PART OF 
The bloody Conquests 
of mighty Tamburlaine. 

With his impassionate fury, for the death of 
his Lady and loue, faire Zenocrate: his fourme 
of exhortation and disciplineto his three 
sons, and the maner of his own death. 

The Prologue. 

THe generall welcomes Tamburlain receiu’d, 
When he arriued last vpon our stage, 
Hath made our Poet pen his second part, 
Wher death cuts off the progres of his pomp. 
And murdrous Fates throwes al his triumphs down, 
But what became of faire Zenocrate,
And with how manie cities sacrifice 
He celebrated her said funerall, 
Himselfe in presence shal vnfold at large.
 
Actus. 1. Scæna. 1. 

Orcanes, king of Natolia, Gazellus, vice­roy of 
Byron, Vpibassa, and their traine, with drums 
and trumpets. 

EGregious Viceroyes of these Eastern parts 
Plac’d by the issue of great Baiazeth: 
And sacred Lord the mighty Calapine: 
Who liues in Egypt, prisoner tothat slaue, 
Which kept his father in an yron cage: 
Now haue we martcht from faire Natolia 
Two hundred leagues, and on Danubius banks,  
Our warlike hoste in compleat armour rest,  
Where Sigismond the king of Hungary  
Should meet our person to conclude a truce.  
What? Shall we parle with the Christian?  
Or crosse the streame, and meet him in the field.  

King of Natolia, let vs treat of peace,  
We all are glutted with the Christians blood,  
And haue a greater foe to fight against,  
Proud Tamburlaine, that now in Asia,  
Neere Guyrons head doth set his conquering feet,  
And means to fire Turky as he goes:  
Gainst him my Lord must you addresse your power.  

Besides, king Sigismond hath brought  
(from Christendome,  
More then his Camp of stout Hungarians,  
Sclauonians, Almans, Rutters, Muffes, and Danes,  
That with the Holbard, Lance, and murthering Axe,  
Will hazard that we might with surety hold.  
Though from the shortest Northren Paralell,  
Vast Gruntland compast with the frozen sea,  
Inhabited with tall and sturdy men,  
Gyants as big as hugie Polypheme:  
Millions of Souldiers cut the Artick line,  
Bringing the strength of Europe to these Armes.  
Our Turky blades shal glide through al their throats,  
And make this champion mead a bloody Fen,  
Danubius stream that runs to Trebizon,  
Shall carie wrapt within his scarlet waues,  
As martiall presents to our friends at home.  
The slaughtered bodies of these Christians.  
The Terrene main wherin Danubius fals,  
Shall by this battell be the bloody Sea.  
The wandring Sailers of proud Italy,  
Shall meet those Christians fleeting with the tyde,  
Beating in heaps against their Argoses.  
And make faire Europe mounted on her bull,  
Trapt with the wealth and riches of the world,  
Alight and weare a woful mourning weed.  

Yet stout Orcanes, Prorex of the world,  
Since Tamburlaine hath mustred all his men,  
Marching from Cairon northward with his camp,  
To Alexandria, and the frontier townes,  
Meaning to make a conquest of our land:  
Tis requisit to parle for a peace  
With Sigismond the king of Hungary:  
And saue our forces for the hot assaults  
Proud Tamburlaine intends Natolia.  

Viceroy of Byron, wisely hast thou said:  
My realme, the Center of our Empery  
Once lost, All Turkie would be ouerthrowne:  
And for that cause the Christians shall haue peace.  
Slauonians, Almains, Rutters, Muffes, and Danes  
Feare not Orcanes, but great Tamburlaine.  
Nor he but Fortune that hath made him great.  
We haue reuolted Grecians, Albanees,  
Cicilians, Iewes, Arabians, Turks, and Moors,  
Natolians, Sorians, blacke Egyptians,  
Illicians, Thracians, and Bythinians,  
Enough to swallow forcelesse Sigismond  
Yet scarse enough t’encounter Tamburlaine.  
He brings a world of people to the field,  
From Scythia to the Orientall Plage  
Of India, wher raging Lantchidol  
Beates on the regions with his boysterous blowes,  
That neuer sea=man yet discouered:  
All Asia is in Armes with tamburlaine,  
Euen from the midst of fiery Cancers Tropick,  
To Amazonia vnder Capricorne.  
And thence as far as Archipellago.  
All Affrike is in Armes with tamburlaine.  
Therefore Viceroies the Christians must haue peace. 
 
Act. 1. Scæna. 2,  

Sigismond, Fredericke, Baldwine, and their traine  
with drums and trumpets.  

ORcanes (as our Legates promist thee)  
Wee with our Peeres haue crost Danubius  
to treat of friedly peace or deadly war: (stream  
Take which thou wilt, for as the Romans vsde  
I here present thee with a naked sword,  
Wilt thou haue war, then shake this blade at me,  
If peace, restore it to my hands againe:  
And I wil sheath it to confirme the same.  

Stay Sigismond, forgetst thou I am he  
That with the Cannon shooke Vienna walles.  
And made it dance vpon the Continent:  
As when the massy substance of the earth,  
Quiuer about the Axeltree of heauen.  
Forgetst thou that I sent a shower of dartes  
Mingled with powdered shot and fethered steele  
So thick vpon the blink=ei’d Burghers heads,  
That thou thy self, then County=Pallatine,  
The king of Boheme, and the Austrich Duke,  
Sent Herralds out, which basely on their knees  
In all your names desirde a truce of me?  
Forgetst thou, that to haue me raise my siege,  
Wagons of gold were set before my tent:  
Stampt with the princely Foule that in her wings  
Caries the fearfull thunderbolts of Ioue,  
How canst thou think of this and offer war?  

Vienna was besieg’d, and I was there,  
Then County=Pallatine, but now a king:  
And what we did, was in extremity:  
But now Orcanes, view my royall hoste,  
That hides these plaines, and seems as vast and wide,  
As dooth the Desart of Arabia.  
To those that stand on Badgeths lofty Tower,  
Or as the Ocean to the Traueiler  
That restes vpon the snowy Appenines:  
And tell me whether I should stoope so low,  
Or treat of peace with the Natolian king?  

Kings of Natolia and of Hungarie,  
We came from Turky to confirme a league,  
And not to dare ech other to the field:  
A friendly parle might become ye both.  

And we from Europe to the same intent,  
Which if your General refuse or scorne,  
Our Tents are pitcht, our men stand in array.  
Ready to charge you ere you stir your feet.  

So prest are we, but yet if Sigismond  
Speake as a friend, and stand not vpon tearmes,  
Here is his sword, let peace be ratified  
On these conditions specified before,  
Drawen with aduise of our Ambassadors.  

Then here I sheath it, and giue thee my hand,  
Neuer to draw it out, or manage armes  
Against thy selfe or thy confederates:  
But whilst I liue will be at truce with thee.  
Nat. But (Sigismond) confirme it with an oath,  
And sweare in sight of heauen and by thy Christ.  

By him that made the world and sau’d my  
(soule  
The sonne of God and issue of a Mayd,  
Sweet Iesus Christ, I sollemnly protest,  
And vow to keepe this peace inuiolable.  

By sacred Mahomet, the friend of God,  
Whose holy Alcaron remaines with vs,  
Whose glorious body when he left the world,  
Closde in a coffyn mounted vp the aire,  
And hung on stately Mecas Temple roofe,  
I sweare to keepe this truce inuiolable:  
Of whose conditions, and our solemne othes  
Sign’d with our handes, each shal retaine a scrowle:  
As memorable witnesse of our league.  
Now Sigismond, if any Christian King  
Encroche vpon the confines of thy realme,  
Send woord, Orcanes of Natolia  
Confirm’d this league beyond Danubius streame,  
And they will (trembling) sound a quicke retreat,  
So am I fear’d among all Nations.  

If any heathen potentate or king  
Inuade Natolia, Sigismond will send  
A hundred thousand horse train’d to the war,  
And backt by stout Lanceres of Germany.  
The strength and sinewes of the imperiall seat.  

I thank thee Sigismond, but when I war,  
All Asia Minor, Affrica, and Greece  
Follow my Standardand my thundring Drums: 
Come let vs goe and banquet in our tents: 
I will dispatch chiefe of my army hence 
To faire Natolia, and to Trebizon, 
To stay my comming gainst proud Tamburlaine. 
Freend Sigismond, and peeres of Hungary, 
Come banquet and carouse with vs a while, 
And thendepart we toour territories. 

Exeunt. 

Actus. 1. Scæna. 3. 

Callapine with Almeda, his keeper. 

SWeet Almeda, pity the ruthfull plight 
Of Callapine, the sonne of Baiazeth, 
Born to be Monarchof the Western world: 
Yet here detain’dby cruell Tamburlaine. 

My Lord I pitie it, and with my heart 
Wish your release, but he whose wrath is death, 
My soueraigne Lord, renowmed tamburlain. 
Forbids you further liberty than this. 

Ah were I now but halfe so eloquent 
To paint in woords, what Ileperfourme in deeds, 
I know thou wouldst depart from hence with me. 

Not for all Affrike, therefore mooue me not.

Yetheare me speake my gentle Almeda.

No speach to that end, by your fauoursir. 

By Cario runs. Al. No talke of running, I tell you sir. 

A litle further, gentle Almeda.

Wel sir, what of this? 

By Cario runs to Alexandria Bay, 
Darotes streames, wherin at anchor lies  
A Turkish Gally of my royall fleet,  
Waiting my comming to the riuer side,  
Hoping by some means I shall be releast,  
Which when I come aboord will hoist vp saile,  
And soon put foorth into the Terrene sea:  
Where twixt the Isles of Cyprus and of Creete,  
We quickly may in Turkish seas arriue.  
Then shalt thou see a hundred kings and more  
Vpon their knees, all bid me welcome home.  
Amongst so mady crownes of burnisht gold,  
Choose which thou wilt, all are at thy command,  
A thousand Gallies mann’d with Christian slaues  
I freely giue thee, which shall cut the straights,  
And bring Armados from the coasts of Spaine,  
Fraughted with golde of rich America:  
The Grecian virgins shall attend on thee,  
Skilful in musicke and in amorous laies:  
As faire as was Pigmalions Iuory gyrle,  
Or louely Io metamorphosed.  
With naked Negros shall thy coach be drawen,  
And as thou rid’st in triumph through the streets,  
The pauement vnderneath thy chariot wheels  
With Turky Carpets shall be couered:  
And cloath of Arras hung about the walles,  
Fit obiects for thy princely eie to pierce.  
A hundred Bassoes cloath’d in crimson silk  
Shall ride before the on Barbarian Steeds:  
And when thou goest, a golden Canapie  
Enchac’d with pretious stones, which shine as bright  
As that faire vail that couers all the world:  
When Phœbus leaping from his Hemi=Spheare,  
Discendeth downward to th’Antipodes.  
And more than this, for all I cannot tell.  

How far hence lies the Galley, say you?  

Sweet Almeda, scarse halfe a league from  
(hence.  

But need we not be spied going aboord?  

Betwixt the hollow hanging of a hill  
And crooked bending of a craggy rock,  
The sailes wrapt vp, the mast and tacklings downe,  
She lies so close that none can find her out,  

I like that well: but tel me my Lord, if I  
should let you goe, would you bee as good as your  
word? Shall I be made a king for my labour?  

As I am Callapine the Emperour,  
And by the hand of Mahomet I sweare,  
Thou shalt be crown’d a king and be my mate,  

Then here I sweare, as I am Almeda,  
Your Keeper vnder Tamburlaine the great,  
(For that’s the style and tytle I haue yet)  
Although he sent a thousand armed men  
To intercept this haughty enterprize,  
Yet would I venture to conduct your Grace,  
And die before I brought you backe again.  

Thanks gentle Almeda, then let vs haste,  
Least time be past, and lingring let vs both.  

When you will my Lord, I am ready,  

Euen straight: and farewell cursed Tambur=  
(laine.  
Now goe I to reuenge my fathers death.  

Exeunt  

Actus. 1. Scæna. 4. 

Tamburlaine with Zenocrate, and his three sonnes, 
Calyphas, Amyras, and Celebinus. with d
rummes and trumpets. 

NOw bright zenocrate, theworlds faire eie, 
Whose beames illuminate the lamps of heaue, 
Whose chearful looks do cleare the clowdy aire 
And cloath it in a christallliuerie, 
Now rest thee hereon faire Larissa Plaines, 
Where Egypt and the Turkish Empire parts, 
Betweene thy sons that shall be Emperours, 
And euery one Commander of a world. 

Sweet tamburlain, when wiltthou leaue these 
Andsauethysacredpersonfreefromscathe: (armes 
And dangerous chances of the wrathfull war.

When heauen shal cease to mooueon both the 
&whenthegroundwheronmysouldiersmarch (poles 
Shal rise aloft and touch thehorned Moon, 
And not before my sweet zenocrate: 
Sit vp and rest thee like a louely Queene. 
So, now she sits in pompe and maiestie: 
When thesemy sonnes, more procious in mine eies 
Than all the wealthy kingdomes I subdewed: 
Plac’d by her side, looke on their mothers face, 
But yet me thinkstheir looks are amorous, 
Not martiall as the sons of Tamburlaine 
Water and ayre being simbolisde in one: 
Argue their want of courage and of wit, 
Their haireas white asmilke and soft as Downe. 
Which should be like the quilles of Porcupines.
As blacke as Ieat, and hard as Iron or steel, 
Bewraies they are too dainty for the wars. 
Their fingers made to quauer on a Lute, 
Their armes to hang about a Ladies necke: 
Their legs to dance and caper in the aire: 
Would make me thinke them Bastards, not my sons, 
But that I know they issued from thy wombe, 
That neuer look’d on man but Tamburlaine. 

My gratious Lord, theyhaue their mothers 
But whe they list,their coquering fathers hart: (looks 
This louely boy the yongest of the three, 
Not long agoe bestrid a Scythian Steed: 
Trotting the ring, and tilting at a gloue: 
Which when he tainted with his slender rod, 
He raign’d him straight and made him so curuet, 
As I cried out for feare he should haue falne, 
Tam. Wel done my boy, thou shalt haue shield and 
Armour of proofe, horse, helme, &Curtle=axe (lance 
And I will teach thee how to charge thy foe, 
And harmelesse run amongthe deadly pikes. 
If thou wilt loue the warres and follow me, 
Thou shalt be madea King and raigne with me. 
Keeping in yron cages Emperours. 
If thou exceed thy elder Brothers worth, 
And shine in compleat vertue more than they, 
Thou shalt be king before them, and thy seed 
Shall issue crowned from their mothers wombe. 

Yes father, you shal see me if I liue, 
Haue vnder me as many kings as you, 
And martch with such a multitude of men, 
As all the world shall tremble at their view. 

These words assure me boy, thouart my sonne, 
When I am old and cannot mannage armes, 
Be thou the scourge and terrour of the world,  

Why may not I my Lord, as wel as he,  
Be tearm’d the scourge and terrour of the world?  
tam. Be al a scourge and terror to the world,  
Or els you are not sons of Tamburlaine.  

But while my brothers follow armes my lord  
Let me accompany my gratious mother,  
They are enough to conquer all the world  
And you haue won enough for me to keep.  

Bastardly boy, sprong fro some cowards loins:  
And not the issue of great Tamburlaine,  
Of all the prouinces I haue subdued  
Thou shalt not haue a foot, vnlesse thou beare  
A mind corragious and inuincible:  
For he shall weare the crowne of Persea,  
Whose head hath deepest scarres, whose breast most  
(woundes,  
Which being wroth, sends lightning from his eies.  
And in the furrowes of his frowning browes,  
Harbors reuenge, war, death and cruelty:  
For in a field whose superfluities  
Is couered with a liquid purple veile,  
And sprinkled with the braines of slaughtered men,  
My royal chaire of state shall be aduanc’d:  
And he that meanes to place himselfe therein  
Must armed wade vp to the chin in blood.  

My Lord, such speeches to our princely sonnes,  
Dismaies their mindes before they come to prooue  
The wounding troubles angry war affoords.  
Cel. No Madam, these are speeches fit for vs,  
For if his chaire were in a sea of blood,  
I would prepare a ship and saile to it.  
Ere I would loose the tytle of a king,  

And I would striue to swim through pooles  
(of blood,  
Or make a bridge of murthered Carcases,  
Whose arches should be fram’d with bones of Turks,  
Ere I would loose the tytle of a king.  

Wel louely boies, you shal be Emperours both  
Stretching your conquering armes from east to west:  
And sirha, if you meane to weare a crowne,  
When we shall meet the Turkish Deputie  
And all his Viceroies, snatch it from his head,  
And cleaue his Pecicranion with thy sword.  

If any man will hold him, I will strike,  
And cleaue him to the channell with my sword,  

Hold him, and cleaue him too, or Ile cleaue  
For we will martch against them presently. (thee  
Theridamas, Techelles, and Casane  
Promist to meet me on Larissa plaines  
With hostes apeece against this Turkish crue,  
For I haue sworne by sacred Mahomet,  
To make it parcel of my Empery,  
The trumpets sound Zenocrate, they come.
  
Actus: 1. Scæna. 5.  

Enter Theridamas, and his traine with Drums  
and Trumpets.  
 
WElcome Theridamas, king of Argier,  
Ther, My Lord the great and migh=  
(ty Tamburlain,  
Arch=Monarke of the world, I offer here,  
My crowne, my selfe, and all the power I haue,  
In all affection at thy kingly feet.  

Thanks good theridamas.  

Vnder my collors march ten thousand Greeks  
And of Argier and Affriks frontier townes,  
Twise twenty thousand valiant men at armes,  
All which haue sworne to sacke Natolia:  
Fiue hundred Briggandines are vnder saile,  
Meet for your seruice on the sea, my Lord,  
That lanching from Argier to Tripoly,  
Will quickly ride before Natolia:  
And batter downe the castles on the shore.  
tam. Wel said Argier, receiue thy crowne againe.
  
Actus. 1. Scæna. 6.  

Enter Techelles and Vsumeasane together.  
  
KIngs of Morocus and of Fesse, welcome.  
Vsu. Magnificent & peerlesse Tamburlaine,  
I and my neighbor King of Fesse haue brought  
To aide thee in this Turkish expedition,  
A hundred thousand expert souldiers:  
From Azamor to Tunys neare the sea,  
Is Barbary vnpeopled for thy sake,  
And all the men in armour vnder me,  
Which with my crowne I gladly offer thee. (gain.  

Thanks king of Morocus, take your crown a=  

And mighty Tamburlaine, our earthly God,  
Whose lookes make this inferiour world to quake,  
I here present thee with the crowne of Fesse,  
And with an hoste of Moores trainde to the war,  
Whose coleblacke faces make their foes retire,  
And quake for feare, as if infernall Ioue  
Meaning to aid them in this Turkish armes,  
Should pierce the blacke circumference of hell,  
With vgly Furies bearing fiery flags,  
And millions of his strong tormenting spirits:  
From strong Tesella vnto Biledull,  
All Barbary is vnpeopled for thy sake.  
tam. Thanks king of Fesse, take here thy crowne a=  
Your presence (louing friends and fellow kings) (gain  
Makes me to surfet in conceiuing ioy,  
If all the christall gates of Ioues high court  
Were opened wide, and I might enter in  
To see the state and maiesty of heauen,  
It could not more delight me than your sight.  
Now will we banquet on these plaines a while,  
And after martch to Turky with our Campe,  
In number more than are the drops that fall  
When Boreas rents a thousand swelling cloudes,  
And proud Orcanes of Natolia,  
With all his viceroies shall be so affraide,  
That though the stones, as at Deucalions flood,  
Were turnde to men, he should be ouercome:  
Such lauish will I make of Turkish blood,  
That Ioue shall send his winged Messenger  
To bid me sheath my sword, and leaue the field:  
The Sun vnable to sustaine the sight,  
Shall hide his head in thetis watery lap,  
And leaue his steeds to faire Boetes charge:  
For halfe the world shall perish in this fight:  
But now my friends, let me examine ye,  
How haue ye spent your absent time from me?  

My Lord our men of Barbary haue martcht  
Foure hundred miles with armour on their backes,  
And laine in leagre fifteene moneths and more,  
For since we left you at the Souldans court,  
We haue subdude the Southerne Guallatia,  
And all the land vnto the coast of Spaine.  
We kept the narrow straight of Gibralter,  
And made Canarea cal vs kings and Lords,  
Yet neuer did they recreate themselues,  
Or cease one day from war and hot alarms,  
And therefore let them rest a while my Lord.  

They shal Casane, and tis time yfaith.  

And I haue martch’d along the riuer Nile  
To Machda, where the mighty Christian Priest  
Cal’d Iohn the great, sits in a milk=white robe,  
Whose triple Myter I did take by force,  
And made him sweare obedience to my crowne.  
From thence vnto Cazates did I martch,  
Wher Amazonians met me in the field:  
With whom (being women) I vouchsaft a league,  
And with my power did march to zansibar  
The Westerne part of Affrike, where I view’d.  
The Ethiopian sea, riuers and lakes:  
But neither man nor child in al the land:  
Therfore I tooke my course to Manico.  
Where vnresisted I remoou’d my campe:  
And by the coast of Byather at last,  
I came to Cubar, where the Negros dwell,  
And conquering that, made haste to Nubia,  
There hauing sackt Borno the Kingly seat,  
I took the king, and lead him bound in chaines  
Vnto Damasco, where I staid before.  

Well done Techelles: what saith  

I left the confines and the bounds of Affrike  
And made a voyage into Europe,  
Where by the riuer Tyros I subdew’d  
Stoka, Padalia, and Codemia.  
Then crost the sea and came to Oblia.  
And Nigra Silua, where the Deuils dance,  
Which in despight of them I set on fire:  
From thence I crost the Gulfe, call’d by the name  
Mare magiore, of th’inhabitantes:  
Yet shall my souldiers make no period  
Vntill Natolia kneele before your feet.  

Then wil we triumph, banquet and carouse,  
Cookes shall haue pensions to prouide vs eates,  
And glut vs with the dainties of the world,  
Lachrima Christi and Calabrian wines  
Shall common Souldiers drink in quaffing boules,  
I, liquid golde when we haue conquer’d him.  
Mingled with corrall and with orientall pearle:  
Come let vs banquet and carrouse the whiles.  

Exeunt.  

Finis Actus primi.  

Actus. 2. Scæna. 1.  

Sigismond, Fredericke, Baldwine,  
with their traine.  

NOw say my Lords of Buda and Bohemia,  
What motio is it that inflames your thoughts,  
And stirs your valures to such soddaine armes?  
Fred. Your Maiesty remembers I am sure  
What cruell slaughter of our Christian bloods,  
These heathnish Turks and Pagans lately made,  
Betwixt the citie Zula and Danubius, 
How through the midst of Verna and Bulgaria 
And almost to the very walles of Rome, 
They haue not long since massacred our Camp, 
It resteth now then that your Maiesly 
Take all aduantages of time and power, 
And worke reuenge vpon these Infidels: 
Your Highnesse knowes for Tamburlaines repaire, 
That strikes a terrour to all Turkish hearts, 
Natolia hath dismist the greatest part 
Of all his armie, pitcht against our power 
Betwixt Cutheia and Orminius mount: 
And sent them marching vp to Belgasar, 
Acantha, Antioch, and Cæsaria, 
To aid the kings of Soria and Ierusalem. 
Now then my Lord, aduantagetake hereof, 
And issue sodainly vpon the rest: 
That in the fortune of their ouerthrow, 
We may discourage all the pagan troope, 
That dare attempt towar with Christians. 

But cals not then your Grace to memorie 
The league we latelymade with king Orcanes, 
Confirm’d by oth and Articles of peace, 
And calling Christfor record of our trueths? 
This should be treacherie and violence,
Against the grace of our profession. 

No whit my Lord: for with such Infidels, 
In whom no faith nor true religion rests, 
We are not bound to those accomplishments, 
The holy lawes of Christendomeinioine: 
But as the faith which they prophanely plight 
Is not by necessary pollycy, 
To be esteem’d assurancefor our selues, 
So what we vow to themshould not infringe 
Our liberty ofarmes and victory. 

Though I confesse the othes they vndertake, 
Breed litle strength to our securitie, 
Yet those infirmities that thus defame 
Their faiths, their honors, and their religion, 
Should not giue vs presumption to the like, 
Our faiths are sound, and must be consumate, 
Religious, righteous, and inuiolate. 

Assure your Grace tis superstition 
To stand so strictly on dispensiue faith: 
And should we lose the opportunity 
That God hath giuen to venge our Christians death 
And scourge their foule blasphemous Paganisme? 
As fell to Saule, to Balaam and the rest, 
That would not kill and curse atGods command, 
So surely will the vengeance of the highest 
And iealous anger ofhis fearefull arme 
Be pour’d withrigour on our sinfullheads, 
If we neglect this offered victory. 

Then arme my Lords, and issue sodainly, 
Giuing commandement to our generall hoste, 
With expedition to assaile the Pagan, 
And take the victorie our God hath giuen. 

Exeunt. 

Actus, 2. Scæna, 2. 

Orcanes, Gazellus, Vribassa with their traine. 

GAzellus, Vribassa, and the rest, 
Now will we march from proud Orminus mount 
To faire Natolia, where our neighbour kings  
Expect our power and our royall presence,  
T’incounter with the cruell tamburlain,  
That nigh Larissa swaies a mighty hoste,  
And with the thunder of his martial tooles  
Makes Earthquakes in the hearts of men and heauen,  

And now come we to make his sinowes shake,  
With greater power than erst his pride hath felt,  
An hundred kings by scores wil bid him armes,  
And hundred thousands subiects to each score:  
Which if a shower of wounding thunderbolts  
Should breake out off the bowels of the clowdes  
And fall as thick as haile vpon our heads,  
In partiall aid of that proud Scythian,  
Yet should our courages and steeled crestes,  
And numbers more than infinit of men,  
Be able to withstand and conquer him.  

Me thinks I see how glad the christian King  
Is made, for ioy of your admitted truce:  
That could not but before be terrified:  
With vnacquainted power of our hoste.  

Enter a messenger.  

Arme dread Soueraign and my noble Lords  
The treacherous army of the Christians,  
Taking aduantage of your slender power,  
Comes marching on vs, and determines straight,  
To bid vs battaile for our dearest liues.  

Traitors, villaines, damned Christians,  
Haue I not here the articles of peace,  
And solemne couenants we haue both confirm’d,  
He by his Christ, and I by Mahomet?  

Hel and confusion light vpon their heads,  
That with such treason seek our ouerthrow,  
And cares so litle for their prophet Christ.  

Can tbere be such deceit in Christians  
Or treason in the fleshly heart of man,  
Whose shape is figure of the highest God?  
Then if there be a Christ, as Christians say,  
But in their deeds deny him for their Christ:  
If he be son to euerliuing Ioue,  
And hath the power of his outstretched arme,  
If he be iealous of his name and honor,  
As is our holy prophet Mahomet,  
Take here these papers as our sacrifice  
And witnesse of thy seruants periury.  
Open thou shining vaile of Cynthia  
And make a passage from the imperiall heauen  
That he that sits on high and neuer sleeps,  
Nor in one place is circumscriptible,  
But euery where fils euery Continent,  
With strange infusion of his sacred vigor,  
May in his endlesse power and puritie  
Behold and venge this Traitors periury.  
Thou Christ that art esteem’d omnipotent,  
If thou wilt prooue thy selfe a perfect God,  
Worthy the worship of all faithfull hearts,  
Be now reueng’d vpon this Traitors soule,  
And make the power I haue left behind  
(Too litle to defend our guiltlesse liues)  
Sufficient to discomfort and confound  
The trustlesse force of those false Christians.  
To armes my Lords, on Christ still let vs crie,  
If there be Christ, we shall haue victorie.  

Sound ro the battell, and Sigismond  
comes out wounded.  

Discomfited is all the Christian hoste,  
And God hath thundered vengeance from on high,  
For my accurst and hatefull periurie.  
O iust and dreadfull punisher of sinne,  
Let the dishonor of the paines I feele,  
In this my mortall well deserued wound,  
End all my penance in my sodaine death,  
And let this death wherein to sinne I die,  
Conceiue a second life in endlesse mercie.  

Enter Orcanes, Gazellus, Vribassa,  
with others. 

Now lie the Christians bathing in their bloods,  
And Christ or Mahomet hath bene my friend.  

See here the periur’d traitor Hungary,  
Bloody and breathlesse for his villany.  

Now shall his barbarous body be a pray  
To beasts and foules, and al the winds shall breath  
Through shady leaues of euery sencelesse tree,  
Murmures and hisses for his hainous sin.  
Now scaldes his soule in the Tartarian streames,  
And feeds vpon the banefull tree of hell,  
That zoacum, that fruit of bytternesse,  
That in the midst of fire is ingraft,  
Yet flourisheth as Flora in her pride,  
With apples like the heads of damned Feends,  
The Dyuils there in chaines of quencelesse flame, 
Shall lead his soule through Orcus burning gulfe: 
From paine to paine, whose change shal neuer end: 
What saiest thou yet Gazellus to his foile: 
Which we referd to iustice of his Christ, 
And to his power, which here appeares as full 
As raies of Cynthia to the clearest sight? 

Tis but the fortune of the wars my Lord, 
Whose power is often proou’d a myracle. 

Yet in my thoughts shallChrist be honoured, 
Not dooing Mahomet an iniurie, 
Whose power had share in this our victory: 
And sincethis miscreant hath disgrac’d his faith, 
And dieda traitor bothto heauen and earth, 
We wil bothwatch and ward shall keepe his trunke 
Amidst these plaines, for Foules to pray vpon. 
Go Vribassa, giue it straight in charge. 

I will my Lord. 

Exit Vrib. 

And now Gazellus, let vs haste and meete Our 
Army and our brother of Ierusalem, 
Of Soria, Trebizon and Amasia, 
And happily with full Natolian bowles 
Of Greekish wine now let vs celebrate 
Our happy conquest, and his angry fate. 

Exeunt. 

Actus. 2. Scæna vltima. 

The Arras is drawen and Zenocrate lies in her bed 
of state, Tamburlaine sitting by her: three Phisi= 
tians about her bed, tempering potions. Theri= 
damas, Techelles, Vsumeasane, and the three 
sonnes. 
 
BLacke is the beauty of the brightest day, 
The golden balle of heauens eternal fire, 
That danc’d with glorie on the siluer waues: 
Now wants the fewell that enflamde his beames 
And all with faintnesse and for foule disgrace, 
He bindes his temples with a frowning cloude, 
Ready to darken earth with endlesse night: 
Zenocrate that gauehim light and life, 
Whose eies shot fire from their Iuory bowers, 
And tempered euery soule withliuely heat, 
Now by the malice of the angry Skies, 
Whose iealousie admits no second Mate, 
Drawes in the comfort of her latest breath 
All dasled with the hellish mists of death. 
Now walk the angels on the walles ofheauen, 
As Centinels to warne th’immortall soules, 
To entertaine deuine Zenocrate. 
Apollo, Cynthia, and theceaslesse lamps 
That gently look’d vpon this loathsome earth, 
Shine downwards now no more, but deck the heauens 
To entertaine diuine Zenocrate. 
The christall springs whosetaste illuminates 
Refined eies with an eternall sight, 
Like tried siluer runs through Paradice 
To entertaine diuine zenocrate. 
The Cherubins and holy Seraphins 
That sing and play before the king of kings, 
Vse all their voices and their instruments 
To entertaine diuine Zenocrate. 
And in this sweet and currious harmony, 
The God that tunes this musicke to our soules: 
Holds out his hand in highest maiesty  
To entertaine diuine Zenocrate.  
Then let some holy trance conuay my thoughts,  
Vp to the pallace of th’imperiall heauen:  
That this my life may be as short to me  
As are the daies of sweet Zenocrate:  
Phisitions, wil no phisicke do her good?  

My Lord, your Maiesty shall soone perceiue:  
And if she passe this fit, the worst is past.  

Tell me, how fares my faire Zenocrate?  

I fare my Lord, as other Emperesses,  
That when this fraile and transitory flesh,  
Hath suckt the measure of that vitall aire  
That feeds the body with his dated health,  
Wanes with enforst and necessary change.  

May neuer such a change transfourme my  
In whose sweet being I repose my life, (loue  
Whose heauenly presence beautified with health,  
Giues light to Phœbus and the fixed stars,  
Whose absence make the sun and Moone as darke  
As when opposde in one Diamiter:  
Their Spheares are mounted on the serpents head,  
Or els discended to his winding traine:  
Liue still my Loue and so conserue my life,  
Or dieng, be the anchor of my death.  

Liue still my Lord, O let my soueraigne liue,  
And sooner let the fiery Element  
Dissolue, and make your kingdome in the Sky,  
Than this base earth should shroud your maiesty:  
For should I but suspect your death by mine,  
The comfort of my future happinesse  
And hope to meet your highnesse in the heauens,  
Turn’d to dispaire, would break my wretched breast.  
And furie would confound my present rest.  
But let me die my Loue, yet let me die,  
With loue and patience let your true loue die:  
Your griefe and furie hurtes my second life,  
Yet let me kisse my Lord before I die,  
And let me die with kissing of my Lord.  
But since my life is lengthened yet a while,  
Let me take leaue of these my louing sonnes,  
And of my Lords whose true nobilitie  
Haue merited my latest memorie:  
Sweet sons farewell, in death resemble me,  
And in your liues your fathers excellency.  
Some musicke, and my fit wil cease my Lord. 
 
They call musicke.  

Proud furie and intollorable fit,  
That dares torment the body of my Loue,  
And scourge the Scourge of the immortall God:  
Now are those Spheares where Cupid vsde to sit,  
Wounding the world with woonder and with loue,  
Sadly supplied with pale and ghastly death:  
Whose darts do pierce the Center of my soule,  
Her sacred beauty hath enchaunted heauen,  
And had she liu’d before the siege of Troy,  
Hellen, whose beauty sommond Greece to armes,  
And drew a thousand ships to Tenedos,  
Had not bene nam’d in Homers Iliads:  
Her name had bene in euery line he wrote:  
Or had those wanton Poets, for whose byrth  
Olde Rome was proud, but gasde a while on her,  
Nor Lesbia, nor Corrinna had bene nam’d,  
zenocrate had bene the argument  
Of euery Epigram or Eligie.  

The musicke sounds, and she dies.  

 What, is she dead? Techelles, draw thy sword,  
And wound the earth, that it may cleaue in twaine,  
And we discend into th’infernall vaults,  
To haile the fatall Sisters by the haire,  
And throw them in the triple mote of Hell,  
For taking hence my faire zenocrate.  
Casane and theridamas to armes,  
Raise Caualieros higher than the cloudes:  
And with the cannon breake the frame of heauen,  
Batter the shining pallace of the Sun,  
And shiuer all the starry firmament:  
For amorous Ioue hath snatcht my loue from hence,  
Meaning to make her stately Queene of heauen,  
What God so euer holds thee in his armes,  
Giuing thee Nectar and Ambrosia,  
Behold me here diuine zenocrate,  
Rauing, impatient, desperate and mad,  
Breaking my steeled lance, with which I burst  
The rusty beames of Ianus Temple doores,  
Letting out death and tyrannising war:  
To martch with me vnder this bloody flag,  
And if thou pitiest Tamburlain the great,  
Come downe from heauen and liue with me againe.  

Ah good my Lord be patient, she is dead,  
And all this raging cannot make her liue,  
If woords might serue, our voice hath rent the aire,  
If teares, our eies haue watered all the earth:  
If griefe, our murthered harts haue straind forth blood  
Nothing preuailes, for she is dead my Lord.  

For she is dead? thy words doo pierce my soule  
Ah sweet theridamas, say so no more,  
Though she be dead, yet let me think she liues,  
And feed my mind that dies for want of her:  
Where ere her soule be, thou shalt stay with me  
Embalm’d with Cassia, Amber Greece and Myrre,  
Not lapt in lead but in a sheet of gold,  
And till I die thou shalt not be interr’d.  
Then in as rich a tombe as Mausolus,  
We both will rest and haue one Epitaph  
Writ in as many seuerall languages,  
As I haue conquered kingdomes with my sword,  
This cursed towne will I consume with fire,  
Because this place bereft me of my Loue:  
The houses burnt, wil looke as if they mourn’d  
And here will I set vp her stature,  
And martch about it with my mourning campe,  
Drooping and pining for zenocrate.  
The Arras is drawen.  

Actus. 3. Scæna. 1,  

Enter the kings of Trebisond and Soria, one brin=  
ging a sword, & another a scepter: Next Natolia  
and Ierusalem with the Emperiall crowne: After  
Calapine, and after him other Lordes: Orcanes  
and Ierusalem crowne him, and the other giue  
him the scepter.  
  
CAlepinus Cyricelibes, otherwise Cybelius, son  
and successiue heire to the late mighty Empe=  
rour Baiazeth, by the aid of God and his friend  
Mahomet, Emperour of Natolia, Ierusalem,  
Trebizon, Soria, Amasia, Thracia, Illyria, Carmo­ 
nia And al the hundred and thirty Kingdomes late con=  
tributory to his mighty father. Long liue Callepinus,  
Emperour of Turky.  

Thrice worthy kings of Natolia, and the rest,  
I will requite your royall gratitudes  
With all the benefits my Empire yeelds:  
And were the sinowes of th’imperiall seat  
So knit and strengthned, as when Baiazeth  
My royall Lord and father fild the throne,  
Whose cursed fate hath so dismembred it,  
Then should you see this Thiefe of Scythia,  
This proud vsurping king of Persea,  
Do vs such honor and supremacie,  
Bearing the vengeance of our fathers wrongs,  
As all the world should blot our dignities  
Out of the booke of base borne infamies.  
And now I doubt not but your royall cares  
Hath so prouided for this cursed foe,  
That since the heire of mighty Baiazeth  
(An Emperour so honoured for his vertues)  
Reuiues the spirits of true Turkish heartes,  
In grieuous memorie of his fathers shame,  
We shall not need to nourish any doubt,  
But that proud Fortune, who hath followed long  
The martiall sword of mighty Tamburlaine,  
Will now retaine her olde inconstancie,  
And raise our honors to as high a pitch  
In this our strong and fortunate encounter,  
For so hath heauen prouided my escape,  
From al the crueltie my soule sustaind,  
By this my friendly keepers happy meanes,  
That Ioue surchardg’d with pity of our wrongs,  
Will poure it downe in showers on our heads:  
Scourging the pride of cursed tamburlain.  

I haue a hundred thousad men in armes,  
Some, that in conquest of the periur’d Christian.  
Being a handfull to a mighty hoste,  
Thinke them in number yet sufficient,  
To drinke the riuer Nile or Euphrates,  
And for their power, ynow to win the world.  

And I as many from Ierusalem,  
Iudæa, Gaza, and Scalonians bounds,  
That on mount Sinay with their ensignes spread,  
Looke like the parti=coloured cloudes of heauen,  
That shew faire weather to the neighbor morne.  

And I as many bring from Trebizon,  
Chio Famastro and Amasia,  
All bordring on the Mare­major sea:  
Riso, Sancina, and the bordering townes,  
That touch the end of famous Euphrates.  
Whose courages are kindled with the flames,  
The cursed Scythian sets on all their townes,  
And vow to burne the villaines cruell heart.  

From Soria with seuenty thousand strong.  
Tane from Aleppo, Soldino, Tripoly,  
And so vnto my citie of Damasco,  
I march to meet and aide my neigbor kings,  
All which will ioine against this Tamburlain,  
And bring him captiue to your highnesse feet.  

Our battaile then in martiall maner pitcht,  
According to our ancient vse, shall beare  
The figure of the semi=circled Moone:  
Whose hornes shall sprinkle through the tainted aire,  
The poisoned braines of this proud Scythian. 

Wel then my noble Lords, for this my friend, 
That freed me from thebondage of my foe: 
I thinke it requisite and honorable, 
To keep my promise, and to make him king, 
That is a Gentleman(I know) at least. 

That’s no matter sir, for being a king, 
For Tamburlain came vp of nothing. 

Your Maiesty may choose some pointedtime, 
Perfourming all your promise to the full: 
Tis noughtfor your maiesty to giue a kingdome. 

Then wil I shortly keep my promise Almeda 

Why, I thank your Maiesty. 

Exeunt. 

Actus. 2. Scæna. 2. 

Tamburlaine with Vsumeasane, and his three sons, 
foure bearing the hearse of Zenocrate, and the 
drums sounding a dolefull martch, the Towne 
burning. 

SO, burne theturrets ofthis cursed towne, 
Flame to the highest region of the aire: 
And kindle heaps ofexhalations, 
That being fiery meteors, may presage, 
Death and destruction to th’inhabitants 
Ouer my Zenith hang a blazing star, 
That may endure till heauen be dissolu’d, 
Fed with thefresh supply ofearthly dregs, 
Threatning a death and famine tothis land, 
Flieng Dragons, lightning, fearfull thunderclaps, 
sindge these fair plaines, and makethem seeme as black 
As is the Island where the Furies maske  
Compast with Lethe, Styx and Phlegeton,  
Because my deare Zenocrate is dead.  

This Piller plac’d in memorie of her,  
Where in Arabian, Hebrew, Greek, is writ  
This towne being burnt by Tamburlaine the great,  
Forbids the world to build it vp againe.  

And here this mourful streamer shal be plac’d  
Wrought with the Persean and Egyptian armes,  
To signifie she was a princesse borne,  
And wife vnto the Monarke of the East.  

And here this table as a Register  
Of all her vertues and perfections.  
tam. And here the picture of zenocrate,  
To shew her beautie, which the world admyr’d,  
Sweet picture of diuine Zenocrate,  
That hanging here, wil draw the Gods from heauen:  
And cause the stars fixt in the Southern arke,  
Whose louely faces neuer any viewed,  
That haue not past the Centers latitude.  
As Pilgrimes traueile to our Hemi=spheare.  
Onely to gaze vpon Zenocrate.  
Thou shalt not beautifie Larissa plaines.  
But keep within the circle of mine armes.  
At euery towne and castle I besiege,  
Thou shalt be set vpon my royall tent.  
And when I meet an armie in the field,  
Whose looks will shed such influence in my campe,  
As if Bellona, Goddesse of the war  
Threw naked swords and sulphur bals of fire,  
Vpon the heads of all our enemies.  
And now my Lords, aduance your speares againe,  
Sorrow no more my sweet Casane now: 
Boyes leaue to mourne, this towneshall euer mourne, 
Being burnt to cynders for your mothers death. 

If I had wept a sea of tearesfor her, 
It would not ease the sorrow I sustaine. 

As is that towne, so is my heart consum’d, 
With griefe and sorrow for my mothers death. 

Mymothers death hath mortified my mind, 
And sorrow stops the passage of my speech. 

But now my boies, leaue off, and [*]ist to me, 
That meane to teach you rudiments of war: 
Ile haue youlearne to sleepe vpon the ground, 
March in your armourthrowe watery Fens, 
Sustaine the scortching heat and freezingcold, 
Hunger and cold right adiuncts of the war. 
And after this, to scale a castle wal, 
Besiege a fort, to vndermine a towne, 
And make whole cyties caper in the aire. 
Then next, the way to fortifieyour men, 
In champion grounds, what figure serues you best, 
For with the quinque=angle fourme is meet, 
Because the corners there may fall more flat: 
Whereas the Fort may fittestbe assailde, 
And sharpest where th’assault is desperate. 
The ditches must be deepe, the Counterscarps 
Narrow and steepe, the wals made highand broad, 
The Bulwarks and therampiers large and strong, 
With Caualieros and thicke counterforts, 
And roome within to lodge sixe thousand men. 
It must haue priuy ditches, countermines, 
And secret issuings to defend theditch. 
It must haue high Argins and couered waies 
To keep the bulwark fronts from battery, 
And Parapets to hide the Muscatiers: 
Casemates to place the greatArtillery, 
And store of ordinance that from euery flanke 
May scoure the outward curtaines of the Fort, 
Dismount the Cannon of the aduerse part, 
Murther the Foe and saue their walles from breach. 
When this is learn’d for seruice on the land, 
By plaine and easie demonstration, 
Ile teach you how to make the water mount, 
That you may dryfoot martch through lakes&pooles, 
Deep riuers, hauens, creekes, and litle seas, 
And make a Fortresse in theraging waues, 
Fenc’d withthe concaue of a monstrous rocke, 
Inuincible by nature of the place. 
When this is done, then are ye souldiers, 
And worthy sonnes of Tamburlain the great, 

My Lord, but this is dangerous to be done, 
We may be slaine or wounded erewe learne. 

Villain, art thou the sonne of Tamburlaine, 
And fear’st to die, or with a Curtle=axe 
To hew thy flesh and make a gaping wound? 
Hast thou beheld a peale of ordinance strike 
A ring of pikes, mingled with shot and horse, 
Whose shattered lims, being tost as high as heauen, 
Hang in the aire as thicke as sunny motes, 
And canst thou Coward stand in feare of death? 
Hast thou not seene my horsmen charge the foe, 
Shot through the armes, cut ouerthwart the hands, 
Dieng their lances with their streaming blood, 
And yet at night carrouse within my tent, 
Filling their empty vaines withaiery wine, 
That being concocted, turnes to crimson blood, 
And wilt thou shun thefield for feare of woundes: 
View me thy father that hath conquered kings, 
And with his hoste martch round about the earth, 
Quite voide of skars, and cleare from any wound, 
That by the warres lost not a dram of blood, 
And see him lance his flesh to teach you all. 

He cuts his arme. 

A wound is nothing be itnere so deepe, 
Blood is the God of Wars rich liuery. 
Now lookI like a souldier, and this wound 
As great a graceand maiesty to me, 
As if a chaire of gold enamiled, 
Enchac’d with Diamondes, Saphyres, Rubies 
And fairest pearle of welthie India 
Were mounted here vnder a Canapie: 
And I sat downe, cloth’d with the massie robe, 
That late adorn’d theAffrike Potentate. 
Whom I brought bound vnto Damascus walles. 
Come boyes and with your fingers search my wound, 
And in my blood wash all your hands at once, 
While I sit smiling to behold the sight. 
Now my boyes, what think you of a wound? 

I know not what I should thinkof it, 
Me thinks tis a pitifull sight.

Tis nothing: giue me a wound father.

And me another my Lord. 

Come sirra, giue me your arme. 

Herefather, cut it brauely as you did your own 

It shall suffice thou darst abide a wound 
My boy, Thou shaltnot loose a drop ofblood, 
Before we meet the armie of the Turke. 
But thenrun desperate through the thickest throngs, 
Dreadlesse of blowes, of bloody wounds and death: 
And let the burning of Larissa wals 
My speech of war, and this my wound yousee 
Teach you my boyes to beare couragious minds, 
Fit for the followers of great tamburlaine. 
Vsumeasane now come let vs martch 
Towards Techelles and Theridamas, 
That we haue sent before to fire the townes, 
The towers and cities ofthese hatefull Turks, 
And hunt that Coward, faintheart, runaway, 
With that accursed traitor Almeda, 
Tilfire and sword haue found them at a bay. 

I long to pierce his bowels with my sword, 
That hath betraied my gracious Soueraigne, 
That curst and damned Traitor Almeda. 

Then let vs see if coward Calapine 
Dare leuie armes againstour puissance, 
That we maytread vpon his captiue necke, 
And treble all his fathers slaueries.
 
Exeunt. 

Actus. 3. Scæna. 1, 

Techelles, Theridamas and their traine. Therid. 
THus haue wee martcht Northwarde from 
(Tamburlaine, 
Vnto the frontier point of Soria: 
And this is Balsera their chiefest hold, 
Wherein is all the treasure of the land. 

Then let vs bring our light Artilery, 
Minions, Fauknets, and Sakars to the trench,  
Filling the ditches with thewalles wide breach, 
And enter in, to seaze vpon the gold: 
How say ye Souldiers, Shal we not? 

Yes, my Lord, yes, come lets about it, 

But stay a while, summon a parle, Drum, 
It may be they will yeeld it quietly, 
Knowing two kings, the friend to tamburlain, 
Stand at the walles, with such a mighty power. 

Summon the battell.  

Captaine with his wife and sonne.
 
What requier you my maisters? 

Captaine, that thou yeeld vp thy hold to vs. 

To you. Why, do you thinke me weary of it? 

Nay Captain, thou art weary of thy life,  
If thou withstand the friends of Tamburlain. 

These Pioners of Argier in Affrica, 
Euen in the cannons face shall raise a hill 
Of earth and fagots higher than thy Fort, 
And ouer thy Argins and coueredwaies 
Shal play vpon the bulwarks of thy hold 
Volleies of ordinance til the breach be made, 
That with his ruinefils vp all the trench. 
And when we enter in, not heauen it selfe 
Shall ransome thee, thy wife and family. 

Captaine, these Moores shall cut the leaden 
(pipes, That bring fresh water tothy men and thee, 
And lie in trench before thy castle walles: 
That no supply ofvictuall shall come in, 
Nor issue foorth, but they shall die: 
And therefore Captaine, yeeld it quietly. 

Were you that are the friends of Tamburlain 
Brothers toholy Mahomet himselfe, 
I would not yeeld it: therefore doo your worst. 
Raise mounts, batter, intrench, and vndermine, 
Cut off the water, all conuoies that can, 
Yet I am resolute, and so farewell. 

Pioners away, and where I stuck the stake, 
Intrench with those dimensions I prescribed: 
Cast vp the earthtowards the castle wall, 
Which til it may defend you, labour low: 
And few or noneshall perish by their shot. 

We will my Lord. 

Exeunt. 

A hundred horse shall scout about the plaines 
To spie what force comes torelieue the holde. 
Both we (theridamas) wil intrenchour men, 
And with theIacobs staffe measure the height 
And distanceof the castlefrom the trench, 
That we may know if our artillery 
Will carie full point blancke vnto their wals. 

Then see the bringing of our ordinance 
Along thetrench into the battery, 
Where we will haue Galions of sixe foot broad, 
To saue our Cannoniers from musket shot, 
Betwixt which, shall our ordinance thunder foorth, 
And with the breaches fall, smoake, fire, and dust, 
The cracke, the Ecchoe and the souldiers crie 
Make deafe the aire, and dimthe Christall Sky. 

Trumpets and drums, alarum presently, 
And souldiers play the men, the holds is yours. 

Enter the Captaine with his wife and 
sonne. 

Come good my Lord, & let vs haste fro hence 
Along the caue that leadsbeyond thefoe, 
No hope is left to saue this conquered hold. 

A deadly bullet gliding through my side, 
Lies heauy on my heart, I cannot liue. 
I feele my liuer pierc’d and all my vaines, 
That there begin and nourish euery part, 
Mangled and torne, and allmy entrals bath’d 
In blood that straineth from their orifex. 
Farewell sweet wife, sweet son farewell, I die. 

Death, whether art thou gone that both we 
Come back again (sweet death) & strike vs both: (liue? 
One minute end our daies, and one sepulcher 
Containe our bodies: death, why comm’st thou not? 
Wel, this must bethe messenger for thee, 
Now vgly death stretch out thy Sable wings, 
And carie both our soules, where his remaines. 
Tell me sweet boie, art thou content to die? 
These barbarous Scythians full of cruelty, 
And Moores, in whom was neuer pitie found, 
Will hew vs peecemeale, put vs to the wheele, 
Or els inuent some torture worsethan that, 
Therefore die by thy louingmothers hand, 
Who gently now wil lancethy Iuory throat, 
And quickly rid thee bothof paine and life.

Mother dispatch me, or Ile kil my selfe, 
For think ye I can liue, and see him dead? 
Giue me your knife, good mother) or strike home: 
The Scythiens shall not tyrannise on me. 
Sweet mother strike, that I may meet my father. 

She stabs him.

Ah sacred Mahomet, if this besin, 
Intreat a pardon of the God of heauen, 
And purge my soule before it come to thee.
 
Entert Theridamas, Techelles and all their traine. 

How now Madam, whatare you doing? 

Killing my selfe, as I haue done my sonne, 
Whose body with his fathers I haue burnt, 
Least cruell Scythians should dismember him.

Twas brauely done, and like a souldierswife, 
Thou shalt with vs to Tamburlaine the great, 
Who when he heares how resolutethou wert, 
Wil match thee with a Viceroy or a king. 

My Lord deceast, was dearer vnto me, 
Than any Viceroy, King or Emperour. 
And for his sakehere will I end my daies.

But Lady goe with vs to Tamburlaine, 
And thoushalt see a man greater [····] Mahomet. 
In whosehigh lookes is much more maiesty 
Than from the Concaue superficies. 
Of Ioues vast pallace the imperiallOrbe, 
Vnto the shinining bower where Cynthia sits, 
Like louely thetis in a Christall robe, 
That treadeth Fortune vnderneath his feete, 
And makes the mighty God of armes his slaue: 
On whom death and the fatall sisters waite, 
With naked swords and scarlet liueries: 
Before whom (mounted on a Lions backe) 
Rhammusia beares a helmet ful ofblood, 
And strowes the way with braines of slaughtered men: 
By whose proud side the vgly furies run. 
Harkening when heshall bid them plague the world,
Ouer whose zenith cloth’d in windy aire, 
And Eagles wings ioin’d to her feathered breast, 
Fame houereth, sounding of her golden Trumpe: 
That to the aduerse poles of that straightline, 
Which measureth the glorious frameof heauen, 
The name of mightie Tamburlain is spread: 
And him faire Lady shall thy eies behold. Come. 

Take pitie ofa Ladies ruthfull teares, 
That humbly craues vpon her knees to stay, 
And cast her bodie in the burning flame, 
That feeds vpon her sonnes and husbands flesh. 

Madam, sooner shall fire consume vs both, 
Then scortch a face so beautiful as this. 
Inframe of which, Nature hath shewed more skill, 
Than when she gaue eternall Chaos forme, 
Drawing from it the shining Lamps of heauen. 

Madam, I am so far in loue with you, 
That you must goe with vs, no remedy. 

Then carie me I care not where you will, 
And let the end of this my fatall iourney, 
Be likewise end to my accursed life. 

No Madam, but the beginningof your ioy, 
Come willinglie, therfore. 

Souldiers now let vs meet the Generall, 
Who by this time is at Natolia, 
Ready to charge the army of the Turke. 
The gold, the siluer, and the pearle ye got, 
Rifling this Fort, deuide in equall shares: 
This Lady shall haue twice so much againe, 
Out of the coffers of our treasurie. 

Exeunt. 

Actus: 3. Scæna. 5. 

Callepine, Orcanes, Ierusalem, Trebizon, Soria, Al= 
meda, with their traine. 

REnowmed Emperour, mighty Callepine, 
Gods great lieftenant ouer all the world: 
Here at Alepo with an hoste of men 
Lies Tamburlaine, this king of Persea: 
In number more than are the quyuering leaues 
Of Idas forrest, where your highnesse hounds, 
With open crie pursues thewounded Stag: 
Who meanes to gyrt Natolias walles with siege, 
Fire the towne and ouerrun the land. 

My royalarmy is as great as his, 
That from the bounds of Phrigia to the sea 
Which washeth Cyprus with his brinish waues, 
Couers the hils, the valleies and the plaines. 
Viceroies and Peeres of Turky play the men,
Whet allyour swords to mangle Tamburlain 
His sonnes, his Captainesand his followers, 
By Mahomet not one of them shal liue. 
The field wherin this battaile shall be fought, 
For euer, terme, the Perseans sepulchre, 
In memorie ofthis our victory. 

Now, he that cals himself the scourge of Ioue, 
The Emperour of the world, and earthly God, 
Shal end the warlike progresse he intends, 
And traueile hedlong tothe lake of hell:
Where legionsof deuils (knowinghe must die  
Here in Natolia, by your highnesse hands) 
All brandishing their brands of quenchlesse fire, 
Streching their monstrous pawes, grin with their 
(teeth. 
And guard the gates to entertaine his soule.

Tel me Viceroies the number of your men, 
And what our Army royall is esteem’d. 

From Palestina and Ierusalem, 
Of Hebrewes, three score thousand fighting men 
Are come since last we shewed your maiesty. 

So from Arabia desart, and the bounds 
Of that sweet land, whose braue 
Metropolis Reedified the faire Semyramis, 
Came forty thousandwarlike foot and horse, 
Since last we numbred to your Maiesty. 

From trebizon in Asia the lesse, 
Naturalized Turks and stout Bythinians 
Came to my bands full fifty thousand more, 
That fighting, knowes not what retreat doth meane, 
Nor ere returne but with the victory, 
Since last we numbred to your maiesty. 

Of Sorians from Halla is repair’d 
And neighbor cities of your highnesse land, 
Ten thousand horse, and thirty thousand foot, 
Since last we numbredto your maiestie: 
So that the Army royall isesteem’d 
Six hundred thousand valiant fighting men. 

Then welcome Tamburlaine vnto thy 
(death. 
Come puissant Viceroies, let vs tothe field, 
(The Perseans Sepulchre) and sacrifice 
Mountaines of breathlesse men to Mahomet. 
Who now with Ioue opens the firmament, 
To see theslaughter of our enemies. 

Actus. 2. Scæna. 1. 

Tamburlaine with his three sonnes, Vsumeasane 
with other. 

HOw now Casane? See a knot of kings, 
Sitting as if they were a telling ridles. 

My Lord, your presence makes them (pale and wan. 
Poore soules they looke as if their deaths were neere.

Why, so he is Casane, I am here, 
But yet Ile saue their liues and make them slaues. 
Ye petty kings of Turkye I am come, 
As Hector did into the Grecian campe. 
To ouerdare the pride of Grœcia. 
And set his warlike person to the view 
Of fierce Achilles, riuall of his fame, 
I doe you honor in the simile. 
For if I should as Hector did Achilles, 
(The worthiest knight that euer brandisht sword) 
Challenge in combat any of you all, 
I see how fearfully ye would refuse, 
And fly my gloue as from a Scorpion.

Now thou art fearfull of thy armies strength, 
Thou wouldst with ouermatchof person fight, 
But Shepheardsissue, base borne tamburlaine, 
Thinke of thy end, this sword shall lance thy (throat. 

Villain, the shepheards issue, at whose byrth 
Heauen did affoord a gratious aspect, 
And ioin’d those stars that shall be opposite, 
Euen tillthe dissolution of the world, 
And neuer meant to make a Conquerour, 
So famous asis mighty Tamburlain: 
Shall so torment thee and that Callapine, 
That like a roguish runnaway, suborn’d 
That villaine there, that slaue, that 
Turkish dog, To false his seruice to his Soueraigne, 
As ye shalcurse the byrth of Tamburlaine. 

Raile not proud Scythian, I shall now reuenge 
My fathers vile abuses and mineowne. 

By Mahomet he shal betied in chaines, 
Rowingwith Christians in a Brigandine, 
About the Grecian Isles to rob and spoile: 
And turne him to his ancient trade againe. 
Me thinks the slaue should make a lusty theefe. 

Nay, when the battaile ends, al we wil meet,
And sit in councellto inuent some paine, 
That most mayvex his body and his soule. 

Sirha, Callapine, Ilehang a clogge about 
our necke for running away againe, you shall not trou= 
ble me thus to come and fetch you. 
But as for you(Viceroy) youshal haue bits, 
And harnest like my horses, draw my coch:
And when ye stay, be lasht with whips of wier, 
Ile haue you learne to feed on prouander,
And in a stable lievpon the planks: 

But Tamburlaine, first thoushalt kneele to vs 
And humbly craue a pardonfor thy life.
 
The common souldiers of our mighty hoste 
Shal bring thee bound vnto the Generals tent. 

And all haue iointly sworne thy cruell death, 
Or bind thee in eternall torments wrath. 

Wel sirs, diet your selues, you knowe I shall 
haue occasion shortly to iourney you. 

See father, how Almeda the Iaylor lookes  
vpon vs.  

Villaine, traitor, damned fugitiue,  
Ile make thee wish the earth had swallowed thee: 
Seest thou not deathwithin my wrathfull looks. 
Goe villaine, cast thee headlong from a rock, 
Or rip thy bowels, and rendout thy heart, 
T’appease my wrath, or els Ile torture thee, 
Searing thy hatefull flesh with burning yrons, 
And drops of scalding lead, while all thy ioints 
Be rackt and beat asunder with the wheele, 
For if thou liuest, not any Element 
Shal shrowde thee from the wrath of tamburlaine 

Wel, in despight of thee he shall be king: 
Come Almeda, receiue this crowne of me, 
I here inuest thee king of Ariadan, 
Bordering on Mare Roso neere to Meca. 

What, take it man.

Good my Lord, let me take it.

Doostthou aske him leaue? here, take it. 

Go too sirha, take your crown, and makevp the 
halfe dozen. 
So sirha, now you are a king you must giue armes. 

So he shal, and weare thy headin his Scutchion: 

No, let him hanga bunch of keies on his stan= 
derd, to put him in remembrance he was a Iailor, that 
when I take him, I may knocke out his braines with 
them, and lock you in the stable, when you shall come 
sweating from my chariot. 

Away, letvs to the field, that the villaine may 
be slaine. 

Sirha, prepare whips, and bring my chariot 
to my Tent: For as soone as the battaileis done, Ile 
ride in triumph through the Camp. 

Enter Theridamas, Techelles and 
their traine. 

How now ye pety kings, loe, here are Bugges 
Wil makethe haire stand vpright on your heads, 
And cast your crownes in slauery at their feet. 
Welcome theridamas and techelles both, 
See ye this rout, and know ye this same king? 

I, my Lord, he was Calapines keeper. 

Wel, now yousee hee is a king, looke to him 
theridamas, when we are fighting, least hee hide his 
crowne as the foolish king of Persea did. 

No Tamburlaine, hee shall not be put to that 
Exigent, I warrant thee. 

You knowenot sir:
But now my followers and my louing friends, 
Fight as you euer did, like Conquerours, 
The glorie ofthis happy day isyours: 
My sterne aspect shall make faire Victory, 
Houering betwixt our armies, lighton me, 
Loden with Lawrell wreathes tocrowne vs all. 

I smile to think, how when this field isfought, 
And rich Natolia ours, our men shall sweat 
With carrieng pearle and treasure on their backes, 

You shall be princesall immediatly: 
Come fight ye Turks, or yeeld vs victory. 

No, we wil meet thee slauish taburlain. 

Actus. 4. Scæna. 1. 

Alarme: Amyras and Celebinus, issues from the tent 
where Caliphas sits a sleepe. 

NOw in theirglories shine the golden crownes 
Of these proud Turks, much like so many suns 
That halfe dismay the maiesty of heauen: 
Now brotherfollowwe our fathers sword, 
That flies with fury swifter than our thoughts, 
And cuts down armies with his conquerings wings, 

Call foorth our laisie brother from the tent, 
For if my father misse him in the field, 
Wrath kindled in the furnace of his breast, 
Wil send a deadly lighteningto his heart. 

Brother, ho, what, giuen so much tosleep 
You cannot leaue it, when our enemies drums 
And ratling cannons thunder in our eares 
Our proper ruine, and our fathers foile? 

Away ye fools, my father needs not me, 
Nor you in faith, but that you wil be thought 
More childish valourous than manly wise: 
If halfe our campe should sitand sleepe with me, 
My father ware enough to scare thefoe: 
You doo dishonor to his maiesty, 
To think our helps will doe him any good. 

What, dar’st thou then be absent fro the fight, 
Knowing my father hates thy cowardise, 
And oft hathwarn’d thee to bestil in field, 
When he himselfe amidst the thickest troopes 
Beats downe our foes to flesh our taintlesse swords. 

I know sir, what it is to kil a man, 
It works remorse of conscience in me, 
I take no pleasure to be murtherous, 
Nor care for blood when wine wil quench my thirst. 

O cowardly boy, fie for shame, come foorth. 
Thou doost dishonor manhood, and thy house. 

Goe, goe tall stripling, fight you for vs both, 
And take my other toward brother here, 
For person like to prooue a second Mars, 
Twill please my mind as wel to heare both you 
Haue won a heape of honor in the field, 
And left your slender carkasses behind, 
As if I lay with you for company. 

You wil not goe then?
You say true. 

Wereall the lofty mounts of Zona mundi, 
That fill the midst of farthest Tartary, 
Turn’d into pearle and proffered for my stay, 
I would not bide thefurie of my father: 
When made a victor inthese hautie arms. 
He comes and findes his sonnes hauehad no shares 
In all the honors he proposde for vs. 

Take you the honor, I will take my ease, 
My wisedome shall excuse my cowardise: 
I goe into the field before I need? 

Alarme, and Amy. and Celeb. run in.
 
The bullets fly at random where they list. 
And should I goe and kill a thousand men, 
I were as soone rewarded with a shot, 
And sooner far than he that neuer fights. 
And should I goe and do nor harme nor good, 
I might haue harme, which all the good 
I haue Ioin’d withmy fathers crowne would neuer cure. 
Ile to cardes: Perdicas. 

Here my Lord. 

Come, thou and I wil goe to cardes to driue away the time. 

Content my Lord, but whatshal we play for? 

Who shal kisse the fairest of the Turkes Con= 
cubines first, when my father hath conquered them. 

Agreed yfaith.

They play. 

They say I am a coward, (Perdicas) and I 
feare as litle their tara,tantaras, their swordes or their 
cannons, as I doe a naked Lady in a net of golde, and 
for feare I should be affraid, wouldput it off and come 
to bed with me. 

Such a feare (my Lord) would neuer make yee  
(retire.  

I would my father would let me be put in the  
front of such a battaile once, to triemy valour. 

Alarme. 

What a coyle they keepe, I beleeue there will be some 
hurt done anonamongst them. 

Enter Tamburlain, Theridamas, Techelles, Vsu= 
measane, Amyras, Celebinus, leading 
the Turkish kings. 

See now ye slaues, my childre stoops your pride 
And leads your glories sheep=like to the sword. 
Bring themmy boyes, and telme if the warres 
Be not a life that mayillustrate Gods, 
And tickle not your Spirits with desire 
Stil to be train’d in armes and chiualry: 

Shal we let goe these kings againmy Lord 
To gather greater numbers gainstour power, 
That they may say, it is not chance doth this, 
But matchlesse strength and magnanimity. 

No, no Amyras, tempt not Fortune so, 
Cherish thy valour stil with fresh supplies: 
And glut it not withstale and daunted foes, 
But wher’s this coward, villaine, not my sonne, 
But traitor to my nameand maiesty.
 
He goes in and brings him out
. 
Image of sloth, and and picture ofa slaue, 
The obloquie and skorneof my renowne, 
How maymy hart, thus fired with mine eies, 
Wounded with shame, and kill’d with discontent, 
Shrowd any thought may holde my striuing hands 
From martiall iustice on thy wretched soule. 

Yet pardon him I pray your Maiesty. (don
Let al of vs intreatyour highnesse par= 

Stand vp, ye base vnworthy souldiers, 
Know ye not yet the argument of Armes?

Good my Lord, let him be forgiuen for once, 
And we wil force him to the field hereafter. 

Stand vp my boyes, and I wil teachyearms, 
And what the iealousie of warres must doe. 
O Samarcanda, where I breathed first, 
And ioy’d thefire of this martiall flesh, 
Blush, blush fairecitie, at thine honors foile, 
And shame of nature with Iaertis streame, 
Embracing thee with deepest of his loue, 
Can neuer wash from thy distained browes. 
Here Ioue, receiue his fainting soule againe, 
A Forme not meettogiue that subiect essence, 
Whose matter isthe flesh of Tamburlain, 
Wherein an incorporeall spirit mooues, 
Made of the mould whereof of thy selfe consists. 
Which makes me valiant, proud, ambitious, 
Ready to leuie power against thy throne, 
ThatI might mooue the turning Spheares of heaue, 
For earthand al this aery region 
Cannot containe the state of Tamburlaine. 
By Mahomet, thy mighty friend I sweare, 
In sending to my issue such a soule, 
Created of the massy dregges of earth, 
The scum and tartar of the Elements, 
Wherein was neither corrage, strength or wit, 
But follie, sloth, and damned idlenesse: 
Thou hastprocur’d a greater enemie, 
Than he that darted mountaines atthy head. 
Shaking theburthen mighty Atlas beares: 
Whereat thou trembling hid’st thee in the aire. 
Cloth’d witha pitchy cloud for being seene. 
And now ye cankred curres of Asia, 
That will not see thestrength of Tamburlaine, 
Although it shine as brightly as the Sun. 
Now you shal feele the strength of Tamburlain, 
And by thestate of his supremacie, 
Approoue the difference twixt himself and you. 

Thou shewest thedifference twixt our selues (and thee. 
In this thy barbarous damned tyranny. 

Thy victories are growne so violent, 
That shortly heauen, fild with the meteors 
Of blood and fire thy tyrannies haue made, 
Will poure down blood and fire on thy head: 
Whose scalding drops wil pierce thy seething braines, 
And with our bloods, reuenge our bloods on thee. 

Villaines, these terrours and thesetyrannies 
(If tyrannies wars iustice ye repute)  
I execute, enioin’d me from aboue:  
To scourge the pride of such as heauen abhors,  
Nor am I made Arch=monark of the world,  
Crown’d and inuested by the hand of Ioue,  
For deeds of bounty or nobility:  
But since I exercise a greater name,  
The Scourge of God and terrour of the world,  
I must apply my selfe to fit those tearmes,  
In war, in blood, in death, in crueltie,  
And plague such Pesants as resisting me,  
The power of heauens eternall maiesty.  
Theridamas, techelles, and Casane,  
Ransacke the tents and the pauilions  
Of these proud Turks, and take their Concubines.  
Making them burie this effeminate brat,  
For not a common Souldier shall defile  
His manly fingers with so faint a boy.  
Then bring those Turkish harlots to my tent,  
And Ile dispose them as it likes me best,  
Meane while take him in.  

We will my Lord.  

O damned monster, nay a Feend of Hell,  
Whose cruelties are not so harsh as thine,  
Nor yet imposd, with such a bitter hate.  

Reuenge it Radamanth and Eacus,  
And let your hates extended in his paines,  
Expell the hate wherewith he paines our soules.  

May neuer day giue vertue to his eies,  
Whose sight composde of furie and of fire  
Doth send such sterne affections to his heart,  

May neuer spirit, vaine or Artier feed  
The cursedsubstanceof that cruel heart, 
But (wanting moisture and remorsefull blood) 
Drie vp with anger, and consume with heat. 

Wel, bark ye dogs, Ile bridle al your tongues 
And bind themclose with bits of burnishtsteele, 
Downe to the channels of your hatefull throats, 
And with the paines my rigourshall inflict, 
Ile make ye roare, that earth may eccho foorth 
The far resounding torments ye sustaine, 
As when an heard oflusty Cymbrian Buls, 
Run mourning round about, the Femals misse, 
And stung with furie oftheir following, 
Fill all the aire with troublous bellowing: 
I will with Engines, neuer exercisde, 
Conquer, sacke, and vtterly consume 
Your cities and your golden pallaces, 
And withthe flames that beat againstthe clowdes 
Incense the heauens. and make the starres to melt, 
As if they were the teares of Mahomet 
For hot consumption ofhis countries pride: 
And til by vision, or by speach I heare 
Immortall Ioue say, Cease my Tamburlaine, 
I will persist a terrour to the world, 
Making the Meteors, that like armed men 
Are seene to march vpon the towers ofheauen, 
Run tilting round about the firmament, 
And breake theirburning Lances in the aire, 
For honor of my woondrous victories. 
Come bring them in to our Pauilion. 
Exeunt. 
 
Actus. 4. Scæna. 3, 

Olympia alone. 

DIstrest Olympia, whose weeping eies 
Since thy arriuall here beheld no Sun, 
Butclosde within the compasse of a tent, 
Hath stain’d thy cheekes, & made thee looklike 
Deuise some meanes to rid thee of thy life. 
(death Rather thanyeeld to his detested suit, 
Whose drift isonely to dishonor thee. 
And since this earth, dew’d with thy brinish teares, 
Affoords no hearbs, whose taste may poison thee, 
Nor yet this aier, beat often with thy sighes, 
Contagious smels, and vapors to infect thee, 
Nor thy close Caue a sword to murtherthee, 
Let this inuention be the instrument. 

Enter Theridamas. 

Welmet Olympia, I sought thee in my tent 
But when I sawthe placeobscure and darke, 
Which withthy beauty thou wast woont to light, 
Enrag’d, I ran about the fields for thee, 
Supposing, amorous Ioue had sent his sonne, 
The winged Hermes, toconuay thee hence: 
But now I finde thee, and that feare is past. 
Tell me Olympia, wilt thou graunt my suit? 

My Lord and husbandes death, with my 
With whom Ib uried al affections, (sweete sons, 
Saue griefe and sorrow which torment my heart, 
Forbids my mindtoentertaine a thought 
That tends to loue, but meditate on death, 
A fitter subiectfor a pensiue soule. 

Olympia, pitie him, inwhom thy looks 
Haue greater operation and more force 
Than Cynthias in the watery wildernes, 
For with thy view my ioyes areat the full, 
And ebagaine, as thou departst from me. 

Ah, pity memy Lord, and draw your sword, 
Making a passage for my troubled soule, 
Which beates against this prison to get out, 
And meet my husband and my louing sonne. 

Nothing, but stil thy husband and thy sonne? 
Leaue this my Loue, and listen more to me, 
Thou shalt be stately Queene of faire Argier, 
And cloth’d in costly cloath of massy gold,
Vpon the marble turrets of my Court 
Sit like to Venus in her chaireof state, 
Commanding all thy princely eie desires, 
And I will cast off armes and sitwith thee, 
Spending my life in sweet discourse of loue. 

No such discourse is pleasantin mine eares,
But that where euery period ends with death, 
And euery line begins with death againe: 
I cannot loue to be an Emperesse. 

Nay Lady, then if nothing wil preuaile, 
Ile vse some other means to makeyou yeeld, 
Such is the sodaine fury of my loue, 
I must and wil bepleasde, and youshall yeeld: 
Come to the tent againe. (honor, 

Stay good my Lord,and wil you saue my 
Ilegiue your Grace a present of such price, 
As all the world cannot affoord the like. 

What is it

An ointment which a cunning Alcumist 
Distilled from the purest Balsamum, 
And simplest extractsof all Minerals, 
Inwhich the essentiall fourme of Marblestone, 
Tempered by science metaphisicall, 
And Spels of magicke from the mouthes of spirits, 
With which if youbut noint your tender Skin, 
Nor Pistol, Sword, nor Lance can pierce your flesh. 

Why Madam, thinke ye to mocke me thus palpably? 

To prooue it, I wil noint my naked throat,
Which when youstab, looke on your weapons point, 
And you shall se’t rebated with the blow. 

Why gaue you not your husband some of it, if 
you loued him, and it so precious? 

My purpose was (my Lord) to spend it so, 
But was preuented by his sodaine end. 
And for a present easie proofe hereof, 
That I dissemble not, trie it on me, 

I wil Olympia, and will keep it for 
The richest present of this Easterne world. 

She noints her throat. 

Now stab my Lord, and markyour weapons 
That wil be blunted if the blow be great. (point 

Here then Olympia. 
What, haue I slaine her? Villaine, stabthy selfe: 
Cut off this arme that murthered my Loue: 
In whom thelearned Rabies of this age, 
Might find as many woondrous myracles, 
As in the Theoria of the world. 
Now Hell is fairer than Elisian, 
A greater Lamp than that bright eie of heauen, 
From whence the starres doo borrow all their light, 
Wanders about the black circumference, 
And now the damned soules are free frompaine, 
For euery Fury gazeth on her lookes: 
Infernall Dis iscourting ofmy Loue, 
Inuenting maskes and stately showes for her, 
Opening the doores of his rich treasurie, 
To entertaine this Queeneof chastitie, 
Whose body shall be tomb’d with allthe pompe 
The treasure of my kingdome may affoord. 

Exit, taking her away. 

Actus. 4. Scæna. 4. 

Tamburlaine drawen in his chariot by Trebizon 
and Soria with bittes in their mouthes, reines in 
his left hand, in his right had a whip, with which 
he scourgeth them, Techelles, Theridamas, Vsu= 
measane, Amyras, Celebinus: Natolia, and Ieru­s
alem led by with fiue or six common souldiers. 

HOlla, ye pampered Iades of Asia: 
What, can ye draw but twenty miles a day, 
And haue so proud a chariot at your heeles, 
And such a Coachman as great Tamburlaine? 
But from Asphaltis, where I conquer’d you, 
To Byron here where thus I honor you? 
The horse that guide the golden eie of heauen, 
And blow the morning from their nosterils, 
Making their fierygate aboue the cloudes, 
Are not so honoured in their Gouernour, 
As you (ye slaues) in mighty Tamburlain. 
The headstrong Iades of Thrace, Alcides tam’d, 
That King Egeus fed with humaine flesh, 
And made so wanton that they knew their strengths, 
Were not subdew’d with valour morediuine, 
Than you by this vnconquered arme of mine. 
To make you fierce, and fit my appetite, 
You shal be fed with flesh asraw asblood, 
And drinkein pailes the strongest Muscadell: 
If you can liue withit, then liue, and draw 
My chariot swifter than the racking cloudes: 
If not, then dy like beasts, and fit for nought 
But perches for the black and fatall Rauens. 
Thus am I right the Scourge of highest Ioue, 
And see thefigure of my dignitie, 
By which I hold my name and maiesty. 

Let me haue coach my Lord, that I may ride, 
And thus be drawen with these two idle kings. 

Thy youth forbids such ease my kingly boy, 
They shall to morrow draw my chariot, 
While these their fellow kings maybe refresht, 

O thou that swaiest the region vnder earth, 
And art a king as absolute as Ioue, 
Come as thou didst in fruitfull Scicilie, 
Suruaieng all the glories of the land: 
And as thou took’st the faire Proserpina, 
Ioyingthe fruit of Ceres garden plot, 
For loue, for honor, and to make her Queene, 
So for iust hate, for shame, and tosubdew 
This proud contemnerof thy dreadfull power, 
Come once in furie and suruay his pride, 
Haling him headlong to thelowesthell. 

Your Maiesty must get some byts for these, 
To bridle their contemptuous cursing tongues, 
That like vnruly neuer broken Iades, 
Breake through the hedges of their hateful mouthes, 
And passe their fixed boundes exceedingly. 

Nay, we wil break the hedges of their mouths 
And pul their kicking colts out oftheir pastures, 

Your Maiesty already hath deuisde 
A meane, as fit as may be to restraine
These coltish coach=horse tongues from blasphemy. 

How like you that sir king? why speak you not? 

Ah cruel Brat, sprung from a tyrants loines, 
How like his cursed father he begins, 
To practize tauntes and bitter tyrannies? 

I Turke, I telthee, this same Boy is he, 
That must (aduaunst in higher pompe than this) 
Rifle the kingdomes I shall leaue vnsackt. 
If Ioue esteeming me too good for earth, 
Raise metomatch the faire Aldeboran, 
Abouethe threefold Astracismeof heauen, 
Before I conquere all the triple world. 
Now fetch me out the Turkish Concubines, 
I will prefer them for the funerall 
They haue bestowed on my abortiue sonne.
 
The Concubines are brought in. 

Where aremy common souldiersnow that fought 
So Lion=like vpon Asphaltis plaines?

Here my Lord. 

Hold ye tal souldiers, take ye Queens apeece 
(I meane such Queens aswere kings Concubines) 
Take them, deuide them and their iewels too, 
And let them equally serue all your turnes. 

We thank your maiesty. 

Brawle not (I warneyou) for your lechery, 
For euery man that so offends shall die, 

Iniurious tyrant, wilt thou so defame 
The hatefull fortunes of thy victory, 
To exercisevpon such guiltlesseDames, 
The violence of thy common Souldiours lust. 

Liue content then (ye slaues) and meet not me 
With troopes ofharlots at your sloothful heeles 

O pity vs my Lord, and saue our honours.

Are ye not gone ye villaines with your spoiles? 
They run away with the Ladies. 

O mercilesse infernall cruelty. 

Saue your honours? twere but time indeed, 
Lost long before you knew what honour meant. 

It seemes they meant to conquer vs my Lord, 
And make vs ieasting Pageants for their Trulles. 

And now themselues shal make our Pageant, 
And common souldiers iest with all their 
Truls, Let themtake pleasure soundly in their spoiles, 
Till we prepare our martch to Babylon, 
Whether we next make expedition. 

Let vs not be idle then my Lord, 
But presently be prest to conquer it. 

We wil techelles, forward thenye Iades: 
Now crowch ye kings of greatest Asia, 
And tremblewhen yeheare this Scourge wil come, 
That whips downe cities, and controwleth crownes, 
Adding their wealth and treasureto my store, 
The Euxine sea North to Natolia, 
The Terrene west, the Caspian north north=east, 
And on the south Senus Arabicus. 
Shal al be loden with the martiall spoiles 
We will conuay with vs to Persea. 
Then shal my natiue city Samarcanda 
And christall waues of fresh Iaertis streame, 
The prideand beautie ofher princely seat, 
Be famous through thefurthest continents, 
For there my Pallace royalshal be plac’d: 
Whose shyning Turrets shal dismay the heauens, 
And cast the fame of Ilions Tower to hell. 
Thorow the streets with troopsof conquered kings, 
Ileride in golden armour like theSun, 
And in my helme a triple plume shal spring, 
Spangledwith Diamonds dancing in the aire, 
To note me Emperourof the threefold world. 
Like to an almond tree ymountedhigh, 
Vpon the lofty and celestiall mount, 
Of euery greene Selinus queintly dect 
With bloomes morewhite than Hericinas browes, 
Whose tender blossoms tremble euery one, 
At euery litle breath that thorow heauen isblowen: 
Then in my coach like Saturnes royal son, 
Mounted his shining chariots, gilt with fire. 
And drawen with princely Eagles through thepath, 
Pau’d with bright Christall, and enchac’d with starres, 
When all the Gods stand and gazing at his pomp. 
So will I ride through Samarcanda streets, 
Vntil my soule disseuered from this flesh, 
Shall mount the milk=white wayand meet him there. 
To Babylon my Lords, to Babylon. 

Exeunt. 

Finis Actus quarti. 

Actus. 5. Scæna. 1. 

Enter the Gouernour of Babylon vpon the walles 
with others. 

WHat saith Maximus? (hath made 

My Lord, the breach the enimie 
Giues such assurance of our ouerthrow, 
That litle hope is leftto saueour liues, 
Or hold our citie from the Conquerours hands. 
Then hangout flagges(my Lord ofhumble truce, 
And satisfie thepeoples generall praiers, 
That Tamburlains intollorable wrath 
May be supprest by our submission

Villaine, respects thou more thy slauishlife, 
Than honor ofthy countrie or thy name? 
Is not my life and state as deeretome, 
The citie and my natiuecountries weale, 
As any thing of price with thy conceit? 
Haue we not hope, for all our battered walles, 
To liue secure, and keep his forces out, 
When this our famous lake of Limnasphaltis 
Makes walles a fresh with euery thing that falles 
Into the liquid substance of his streame, 
More strong than arethe gates of death or hel. 
What faintnesse should dismay our courages, 
When we are thus defenc’d against our Foe, 
And haue no terrour but his threatning lookes? 

Enter another, kneeling to the 
Gouernour. 

My Lord, if euer youdid deed of ruth, 
And now will work a refuge to our liues,
Offer submission, hang vp flagsof truce, 
That Tamburlaine may pitie our distresse, 
And vse vs like a louingConquerour, 
Though this beheld his last daies dreadfull siege, 
Wherein he spareth neither man nor child, 
Yet are there Christians of Georgia here, 
Whose state he euer pitied and relieu’d: 
Wil get his pardon if your grace would send. 

How is my soule enuironed, 
And this eternisde citie Babylon, 
Fill’d witha packe of faintheart Fugitiues, 
That thus intreat their shame and seruitude? 

My Lord, if euer you wil winour hearts, 
Yeeld vp thetowne, saue our wiues and children: 
For I wil cast my selfe fromoff these walles, 
Or die some death of quickest violence, 
Before I bide the wrath of Tamburlaine. 

Villaines, cowards, Traitors to our state, 
Fall to the earth, and pierce the pit of Hel, 
That legions of tormenting spirits may vex 
Your slauish bosomes with continuall paines, 
I care not, nor the towne will neuer yeeld 
As long as any life is in my breast.
 
Enter Theridamas and Techelles, 
with other souldiers. 

Thou desperate Gouernour of Babylon, 
To saue thy life, and vs a litlelabour, 
Yeeld speedily thecitie to our hands, 
Or els be sure thou shalt beforc’d with paines, 
More exquisite than euer Traitor felt. 

Tyrant, I turne the traitor in thy throat, 
And wil defend it in despight of thee.
Call vp the souldiers to defend these wals. 

Yeeld foolish Gouernour, we offer more 
Than euer pet we did tosuch proud slaues, 
As durst resist vs till our third daies siege: 
Thou seest vs prest to giue the last assault, 
And that shal bide no more regard of parlie. 

Assault and spare not, we wil neuer yeeld. 

Alarme, and they scale the walles. 

Enter Tamburlain, with Vsumeasane. Amyras, and 
Celebinus, with others, the two spare kings. 

The stately buildings of faire Babylon, 
Whose lofty Pillers, higher than the cloudes, 
Were woont to guide the seaman in the deepe. 
Being caried thither by the cannons force, 
Now fil the mouth of Limnasphaltes lake, 
And make a bridge vnto the battered walles, 
Where Belus, Ninus and great Alexander 
Haue rode in triumph, triumphs Tamburlaine, 
Whose chariot wheeles haue burst th’Assirians bones, 
Drawen with these kings on heaps of carkasses, 
Now inthe place where faire Semiramis, 
Courted by kings and peeres of Asia, 
Hathtrode the Meisures, do my souldiersmartch, 
And in the streets, where braueAssirian Dames 
Haue rid in pompe like rich Saturnia, 
With furious words and frowning visages, 
My horsmen brandish their vnruly blades. 

Enter Theridamas and Techelles bringing 
the Gouernor of Babylon. 

Who haue ye there my Lordes?   

The sturdy Gouernour of Babylon,  
That made vs all the labour for the towne,  
And vsde such slender reckning of you maiesty.  

Go bind the villaine, he shall hang in chaines,  
Vpon the ruines of this conquered towne,  
Sirha, the view of our vermillion tents,  
Which threatned more than if the region  
Next vnderneath the Element of fire,  
Were full of Commets and of blazing stars,  
Whose flaming traines should reach down to the earth  
Could not affright you, no, nor I my selfe, 
The wrathfull messenger of mighty Ioue,  
That with his sword hath quail’d all earthly kings,  
Could not perswade you to submission,  
But stil the ports were shut: villaine I say,  
Should I but touch the rusty gates of hell, 
The triple headed Cerberus would howle,
And wake blacke Ioue to crouch and kneele to me.  
But I haue sent volleies of shot to you, 
Yet could not enter till the breach was made, 

Nor if my body could haue stopt the breach,  
Shouldst thou haue entred, cruel tamburlaine: 
Tis not thy bloody tents can make me yeeld, 
Nor yet thy selfe, the anger of the highest, 
For though thy cannon shooke the citie walles,  
My heart did neuer quake, or corrage faint.  

Wel, now Ile make it quake, go draw him vp, 
Hang him vp in chaines vpon the citie walles, 
And let my souldiers shoot the slaue to death. 

Vile monster, borne of some infernal hag,  
And sent from hell to tyrannise on earth, 
Do all thy wurst, nor death, nor Tamburlaine,  
Torture orpaine can daunt my dreadlesse minde. 

Vp with him then, his body shalbescard. 

But Tamburlain, in Lymnasphaltis lake, 
Therelies more gold than Babylon isworth, 
Which when the citie was besieg’d I hid, 
Saue but my life and I wil giue it thee. (life, 

Then for all your valour, youwould saue your 
Where about lies it? Gou. Vnder a hollow bank, right opposite 
Against the Westerne gate of Babylon. 

Go thither some ofyou and take his gold, 
The rest forward with execution, 
Away with him hence, let him speake no more: 
I think I make your courage something quaile, 
When this is done, we’ll martch from Babylon, 
And make our greatesthasteto Persea: 
These Iades arebroken winded, and halfe tyr’d, 
Vnharnesse them, and let me haue fresh horse:
So, now their best is done to honour me, 
Take them, and hang them both vp presently. 

Vild Tyrant, barbarous bloody Tamburlain

Take them away Theridamas, see them 
(dispatcht. 
Ther I will my Lord

Come Asian Viceroies, toyour taskes a while 
And take such fortune as your fellowes felt. 

First let thy Scythyanhorse teareboth our 
Rather then we should draw thy chariot. (limmes 
And like baseslaues abiect our princely mindes 
To vile and ignominious seruitude. 

Rather lend methy weapon Tamburlain, 
That I may sheath it in this breast of mine, 
A thousand deathes could not torment our hearts 
More than the thought of this dooth vexe our soules. 

Theywill talk still my Lord, if you doe not bridle them. 

Bridle them, and let me to my coach. 

They bridle them.

See now my Lord how braue the Captaine (hangs.

Tis braue indeed my boy, wel done, 
Shoot first my Lord, and then the rest shall follow.

Then haue at him to begin with all. 

Theridamas shootes. 

Yetsaue my life, and let this wound appease 
The mortall furie of great Tamburlain. 

No, though Asphaltis lake were liquid gold, 
And offer’d me as ransome for thy life, 
Yet shouldst thou die, shoot at him all at once.
 
They shoote. 

So now hehangs like Bagdets Gouernour, 
Hauing as many bullets inhis flesh, 
As there be breaches inher battered wall. 
Goe now and bind the Burghers hand and foot, 
And cast them headlong in the cities lake: 
Tartars and Perseans shall inhabit there, 
And to command thecitie, I will build 
A Cytadell, that all Affrica 
Which hath bene subiect to the Persean king, 
Shall pay me tribute for, in Babylon. 

What shal be done with their wiues and chil= 
dren my Lord. 

Techelles, Drownethem all, man, woman, 
Leaue not a Babylonian in the towne. (andchild, 

I will about it straight, come Souldiers. 

Exit 

Now Casane, wher’s the Turkish Alcaron, 
And all the heapes of supersticious bookes, 
Found in the Temples of that Mahomet? 
Whom I haue thought a God, they shal be burnt. 

Here they aremy Lord. 

Wel said, let there be a fire presently, 
In vaine I see menworship Mahomet, 
My sword hath sent millions of Turks to hell. 
Slew all his Priests, his kinsmen, and his friends, 
And yetI liue vntoucht by Mahomet: 
There is a God full of reuenging wrath, 
From whom the thunder and the lightning breaks, 
Whose Scourge I am, and him will I obey. 
So Casane, fling theminthe fire. 
Now Mahomet, if thou haue any power, 
Come downethy selfe and worke a myracle, 
Thou art not woorthy to be worshipped, 
That suffers flames of fire toburne the writ 
Wherein the sum of thy religion rests. 
Why send’st thou not a furious whyrlwind downe, 
To blow thy Alcaron vp tothy throne, 
Where menreport, thou sitt’st by God himselfe, 
Or vengeance on thehead of Tamburlain, 
That shakes his sword againstthy maiesty. 
And spurns the Abstracts of thy foolish lawes. 
Wel souldiers, Mahomet remaines in hell, 
He cannot heare thevoice of Tamburlain, 
Seeke out another Godhead to adore, 
The God that sits inheauen, if any God, 
For he is God alone, and none but he. 

I haue fulfil’d your highnes wil, my Lord, 
Thousands of men drown’d in Asphaltis Lake, 
Haue made the water swell aboue the bankes, 
And fishes feed by humaine carkasses, 
Amasde, swim vp and downe vpon the waues, 
As when they swallow Assafitida, 
Which makes them fleet aloft and gaspe for aire, 

Wel then my friendly Lordes what now re= 
But that we leaue sufficient garrison 
(maines 
And presently depart to Persea, 
To triumph after all our victories. 

I, good my Lord, let vs in hast to Persea, 
And let this Captaine beremoou’dthe walles, 
To some high hill about the citie here. 

Let it beso, about it souldiers: 
But stay, I feele my selfe distempered sudainly. 

What is it dares distemper Tamburlain?

Something techelles but I know not what, 
But foorth ye vassals, what so ere it be, 
Sicknes ordeath can neuer conquer me. 

Exeunt 

Actus. 5. Scæna. 4. 

Enter Callapine, Amasia, with drums and trumpets. 

KIng of Amasia, now our mighty hoste, 
Marcheth in Asia maior wherethe streames, 
Of Euphrates and Tigris swiftly runs, 
And here may we behold great Babylon, 
Circled about with Limnasphaltis Lake, 
Where tamburlaine with all his armie lies, 
Which being faint and weary with the siege, 
Wee may lie ready to encounter him. 
Before his hoste be full from Babylon, 
And so reuengeour latest grieuous losse, 
If God or Mahomet send any aide. 

Doubt not my lord, but we shal conquer him 
The Monster that hathdrunke a sea of blood, 
And yet gapes stil for more to quenchhis thirst, 
Our Turkish swords shal headlong send to hell, 
And that vile Carkasse drawne by warlike kings, 
The Foules shall eate, for neuer sepulchre 
Shall grace that base=borne Tyrant tamburlaine. 

When I record my Parents’ slauishlife, 
Their crueldeath, mineowne captiuity, 
My Viceroies bondage vnder tamburlaine, 
Me thinks I could sustaine a thousand deaths, 
To be reueng’d of allhis Villanie. 
Ah sacred Mahomet, thou that hast seene, 
Millions of Turkes perish by Tamburlaine, 
Kingdomes made waste, braue cities sackt & burnt, 
And but one hoste is left to honor thee. 
And thy obedient seruant Callapine. 
And make him after allthese ouerthrowes, 
To triumph ouer cursed Tamburlaine. 

Feare not my Lord, I see great Mahomet 
Clothed in purple clowdes, and on his head 
A Chapletbrighter than Apollos crowne, 
Marching about the ayer witharmed men, 
To ioine with you againstthis Tamburlaine. 
Renowmed Generall mighty Callapine, 
Though God himselfe and holy Mahomet, 
Should come in person to resist your power, 
Yet might your mighty hoste incounter all, 
And pull proud Tamburlaine vpon his knees,  
To sue for mercie at your highnesse feete, 

Captaine the force of Tamburlaine is great, 
His fortune greater, and the victories 
Wherewith he hath so soredismaide the world, 
Are greatest to discourage all our drifts, 
Yet when the pride of Cynthia is at full, 
She waines againe, and so shall his I hope, 
For we hauehere the chiefeselected men 
Of twenty seuerall kingdomes at the least: 
Nor plowman, Priest, nor Merchant staies athome. 
All Turkie is in armes with Callapine. 
And neuer wil we sunder camps and armes, 
Before himselfe or his beconquered. 
This is the time that must eternizeme, 
For conquering the Tyrant of the world. 
Come Souldiers, let vs lie in wait for him 
And if we find him absent from his campe, 
Or that it be reioin’d again at full, 
Assaile it and be sure of victorie. 

Exeunt.

Actus. 5. Scæna. 6. 

Theridamas, Techelles, Vsumeasane. 

WEepe heauens, and vanishinto liquid teares 
Fal starres that gouerne his natiuity, 
And sommon al the shining lamps of heauen 
To cast their bootlesse fires to the earth. 
And shed their febleinfluence in the aire. 
Muffle your beauties with eternall clowdes, 
For hell and darknesse pitchtheir pitchy tentes, 
And Death with armies of Cymerian spirits 
Giues battile gainst the heartof Tamburlaine. 
Now in defiance of that woonted loue, 
Your sacred vertuespour’d vpon his throne, 
And made his state an honor to the heauens, 
These cowards inuisiblie assaile hys soule, 
And threaten conquest on our Soueraigne: 
Butif he die, your glories aredisgrac’d, 
Earth droopes and saies, that hell in heauen is plac’d,

O then ye Powers that sway eternal seates, 
And guide this massy substance of the earthe, 
If you retaine desert ofholinesse, 
As your supreame estates instruct our thoughtes, 
Be not inconstant, carelesse of your fame, 
Bearenot the burthen of your enemies ioyes, 
Triumphing in his fall whom you aduaunst, 
But as his birth, life, health and maiesty 
Were strangely blest and gouernedby heauen, 
So honour heauen til heauen dissolued be, 
His byrth, his life, his health and maiesty. 

Blush heauen to loose the honor of thy name, 
To see thy foot=stoole set vpon thy head, 
And let no basenesse in thy haughty breast, 
Sustaine a shame of such inexcellence: 
To see the deuils mount in Angels throanes, 
And Angels diue into the pooles of hell. 
And though they think their painfull date is out, 
And that their power is puissantas Ioues, 
Which makes them manage armes against thy state, 
Yet make them feele the strength of Tamburlain, 
Thy instrument and note of Maisty. 
Is greater far, than they can thus subdue. 
For if he die, thy glorie is disgrac’d, Earth 
Earth droopes and saies that helinheauen is plac’d. 

What daring God torments my body thus, 
And seeks to conquer mighty Tamburlaine, 
Shall sicknesse prooue me now to be a man, 
That haue bene tearm’d the terrour of the world? 
Techelles and therest, cometake your swords, 
And threaten him whose hand afflicts my soul, 
Come let vs march against the powers of heauen, 
And set blacke streamers in the firmament, 
To signifie the slaughter ofthe Gods, 
Ah friends, what shal I doe I cannot stand, 
Come carie me to war against the Gods, 
That thus inuie the healthof Tamburlaine. 

Ah good my Lord, leaue these impatient words, 
Which ad much danger to your malladie. 

Why shal I sit and languish inthis paine, 
No, strike the drums, and in reuenge of this, 
Come let vs chardge our speares and pierce his breast, 
Whose shoulders beare the Axis of the world, 
That if I perish, heauen and earth may fade, 
theridamas, haste to the court of Ioue, 
Will him to send Apollo hether straight, 
Tocureme,orIlefetchhimdownemyselfe. (cease, 

Sit stil my gratious Lord, this griefe wil 
And cannot last, it is so violent. 

Not last techelles, no, for I shall die, 
See where my slaue, the vglie monster death 
Shaking and quiuering, pale and wanfor feare, 
Stands aiming at me with his murthering dart, 
Who flies away ateuery glance I giue, 
And when I look away, comes stealing on: 
Villaine away, and hie thee to the field, 
I and myne armiecome to lode thy barke 
With soulesof thousand mangled carkasses, 
Looke where he goes, but see, hecomes againe 
Because I stay, techelles let vs march, 
And weary Death with bearing soules to hell. 

Pleaseth your Maiesty to drink this potion. 
Which wil abatethe furie of your fit, 
And cause some milder spirits gouerne you. 

Tel me, what think you of my sicknes now? 

I view’d your vrine, and the Hipostates 
Thick and obscure dothmake your danger great, 
Your vaines are full of accidentall heat, 
Whereby the moisture of your blood is dried, 
The Humidum and Calor, which some holde 
Is not a parcell of the Elements, 
But of a substance more diuine and pure, 
Is almost cleane extinguished and spent. 
Which being thecause oflife, imports your death. 
Besides my Lord, this day is Criticall, 
Dangerous to those, whose Chrisis is as yours: 
Your Artiers which alongst the vaines conuey 
The liuely spirits which the heart ingenders 
Are partcht and void of spirit that the soule 
Wanting those Organnons by which it mooues, 
Can not indure by argument of art. 
Yet if your maiestymay escape this day, 
No doubt, but you shal soone recouer all. 

Then will I comfort all my vital parts, 
And liue inspight of death aboue a day

Alarme within. 

My Lord, yong Callapine that lately fled from 
your maiesty, hath nowe gathered a fresh Armie, and 
hearing your absence in the field, offers to set vpon vs 
presently. 

See my Phisitions now, how Ioue hath sent, 
A present medicince to recure my paine: 
My looks shall make them flie, and might I follow, 
There should not one of all the villaines power 
Liue to giue offerof another fight. 

I ioy my Lord, your highnesse is so strong, 
That can endure so well your royall presence, 
Which onely will dismay the enemy. 

I know it wil Casane: draw you slaues, 
Inspight of death I will goe show my face. 

Alarme, Tamb. goes in, and comes out 
againe with al the rest. 

Thus are the villaines, cowards fled for feare, 
Like Summers vapours, vanisht by theSun.
And could I but a while pursue the field, 
That Callapine should be my slaue againe. 
But I perceiue my martial strength is spent, 
In vaine I striue and raile against those powers, 
That meane t’inuest me in a higher throane, 
As much too highfor this disdainfull earth. 
Giue me a Map, then let me see how much 
Is left for metoconquer all theworld, 
That these my boies may finish all my wantes, 

One brings a Map. 

Here I began tomartch towards Persea, 
Along Armenia and theCaspian sea, 
And thence vnto Bythinia, where I tooke 
The Turke and his great Empresse prisoners, 
Then martcht I into Egypt and Arabia, 
And here not far from Alexandria, 
Whereas the Terren and the red sea meet, 
Being distantlesse than ful a hundred leagues, 
I meant to cut a channellto them both, 
That men might quickly saile to India. 
From thence to Nubia neere Borno Lake, 
And so along the Ethiopian sea, 
Cutting the Tropicke line of Capricorne, 
I conquered all as far as Zansibar, 
Then by the Northerne part of Affrica. 
I came at last to Græcia, and from thence 
To Asia, where I stay against my will, 
Which is from Scythia, where I first began, 
Backeward and forwards nere fiue thousand leagues, 
Looke here my boies, see what a world of ground, 
Lies westward from the midst of Cancers line,
Vnto the rising of this earthly globe,
Whereas theSun declining from our sight, 
Begins the day with our Antypodes: 
And shall I die, and this vnconquered? 
Loe here my sonnes, are all the golden Mines, 
Inestimable drugs and precious stones, 
More worth than Asia, and the world beside, 
And from th’Antartique Pole, Eastward behold 
As much more land, which neuer was descried, 
Wherein are rockes of Pearle, that shine as kright 
As all the Lamps that beautifie the Sky, 
And shal I die, and this vnconquered? 
Here louely boies, what death forbids my life, 
That let your liuescommaund inspight of death. 

Alas my Lord, how should our bleeding harts 
Wounded and broken with your Highnesse griefe, 
Retaine a thought ofioy, or sparke of life? 
Your soul giues essence to our wretched subiects. 
Whose matter isincorporoat in your flesh. 

Your paines do pierceour soules, no hopesur= 
For by your life we entertaine our liues, (uiues, 

But sons, this subiect not of forceenough, 
To hold the fiery spirit it containes, 
must part, imparting his impressions, 
By equall portions into bothyour breasts: 
My flesh deuided in your precious shapes, 
Shal still retaine my spirit, though I die, 
And liue inall your seedes immortally: 
Then now remooue me, that I may resigne 
My place and propertytle to my sonne: 
First take my Scourge and my imperiall Crowne, 
And mount my royall chariot of estate, 
That I maysee thee crown’d before I die, 
Help me (my Lords) to make my last remooue. 
ther. Awoful change my Lord, that dauntsour 
More than the ruine of our proper soules. 
(thoughts, 

Sit vp my sonne, let me see how well 
Thou wilt become thy fathers maiestie. 

They crowne him. 

With what a flinty bosome should I ioy, 
The breath of life, and burthen of my soule, 
If not resolu’d into resolued paines, 
My bodies mortified lineaments 
should exercise the motions ofmy heart, 
Pierc’d with the ioy of any dignity? 
O father, if thevnrelenting eares 
Of death and hell be shut against my praiers, 
And that the spightfull influence ofheauen. 
Denie my soule fruition of her ioy,
How should I step or stir my hatefull feete, 
Against the inward powers of my heart, 
Leading a life that onely striues to die, 
And plead in vaine, vnpleasing soueranity. 

Let not thy loue exceed thyne honor sonne, 
Nor bar thy mind that magnanimitie, 
That nobly must admit necessity: 
Sit vp my boy, and with those silken raines, 
Bridle thesteeled stomackes of those Iades. 

My Lord, you must obey his maiesty, 
Since Fate commands, and proud necessity. 

Heauens witnes me, with what a broken hart 
And damned spirit I ascend this seat,
[*]nd send my soule before my father die, 
His anguish and his burning agony. 

Now fetch the hearse of faire Zenocrate, 
Let it be plac’d by this my fatallchaire, 
And serue as parcell of my funerall. 

Then feeles your maiesty no soueraigne ease, 
Nor may our hearts all drown’d in teares of blood, 
Ioy any hope ofyour recouery? 

Casane no, the Monarke of the earth, 
And eielesse Monster that torments my soule, 
Cannot behold the teares ye shed for me, 
And therefore stil augments his cruelty. 

Then let some God oppose his holy power, 
Against the wrath and tyranny of death, 
That his teare­thyrsty and vnquenched hate, 
May be vpon himselfe reuerberate. 

They bring in the hearse. 

Now eies, inioy your latest benefite, 
And when my soule hath vertue of your sight, 
Pierce through thecoffin and the sheet of gold, 
And glut your longings with a heauen of ioy. 
So, raigne my sonne, scourge and controlle those slaues 
Guiding thy chariotwith thy Fathers hand. 
As precious is the charge thou vndertak’st 
As that which Clymens brainsicke sonne did guide, 
When wandring Phœbes Iuory cheeks werescortcht 
And all the earthlike AEtna breathing fire: 
Be warn’d by him, then learne with awfull eie 
To sway a throane asdangerous ashis: 
For if thy body thriue not full of thoughtes 
As pure and fieryas Phyteus beames, 
The nature of these proud rebelling Iades 
Wil take occasion by the slenderest haire, 
And draw thee peecemeale like Hyppolitus, 
Through rocks more steepe and sharp than 
Caspian The nature of thy chariot wil not beare (cliftes. 
A guide of baser temper thanmy selfe, 
More then heauens coach, theprideof Phaeton. 
Fa[····]l my boies, my dearest friends, farewel, 
My body feeles, my soule dooth weepe to see 
Your sweet desires depriu’d my company, 
For Tamburlaine, the Scourge of God must die. 

Meet heauen & earth, & here let al things end 
For earth hath spent the pride of all her fruit, 
And heauen consum’d his choisest liuing fire. 
Let earth and heauen his timelesse death deplore, 
For both their woorths wil equall him no more. 

FINIS. 
