 

. Elsinore.  platform before the Castle.



Who’s there?


Nay, answer me. Stand and unfold yourself.


Long live the King!


Barnardo?


He.


You come most carefully upon your hour.


’Tis now struck twelve. Get thee to bed, Francisco.


For this relief much thanks. ’Tis bitter cold,

And  am sick at heart.


Have you had quiet guard?


Not a mouse stirring.


Well, good night.

If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,

The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.



think  hear them. Stand, ho! Who is there?


Friends to this ground.


And liegemen to the Dane.


Give you good night.


, farewell, honest soldier, who hath reliev’d you?


Barnardo has my place. Give you good-night.



Holla, Barnardo!


Say, what, is Horatio there?


piece of him.


Welcome, Horatio. Welcome, good Marcellus.


What, has this thing appear’d again tonight?


have seen nothing.


Horatio says ’tis but our fantasy,

And will not let belief take hold of him

Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us.

Therefore  have entreated him along

With us to watch the minutes of this night,

That if again this apparition come

He may approve our eyes and speak to it.


Tush, tush, ’twill not appear.


Sit down awhile,

And let us once again assail your ears,

That are so fortified against our story,

What we two nights have seen.


Well, sit we down,

And let us hear Barnardo speak of this.


Last night of all,

When yond same star that’s westward from the pole,

Had made his course t’illume that part of heaven

Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,

The bell then beating one—


Peace, break thee off. Look where it comes again.



In the same figure, like the King that’s dead.


Thou art a scholar; speak to it, Horatio.


Looks it not like the King? Mark it, Horatio.


Most like. It harrows me with fear and wonder.


It would be spoke to.


Question it, Horatio.


What art thou that usurp’st this time of night,

Together with that fair and warlike form

In which the majesty of buried Denmark

Did sometimes march? By heaven  charge thee speak.


It is offended.


See, it stalks away.


Stay! speak, speak!  charge thee speak!



’Tis gone, and will not answer.


How now, Horatio! You tremble and look pale.

Is not this something more than fantasy?

What think you on’t?


Before my God,  might not this believe

Without the sensible and true avouch

Of mine own eyes.


Is it not like the King?


As thou art to thyself:

Such was the very armour he had on

When he th’ambitious Norway combated;

So frown’d he once, when in an angry parle

He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.

’Tis strange.


Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,

With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.


In what particular thought to work  know not;

But in the gross and scope of my opinion,

This bodes some strange eruption to our state.


Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,

Why this same strict and most observant watch

So nightly toils the subject of the land,

And why such daily cast of brazen cannon

And foreign mart for implements of war;

Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task

Does not divide the Sunday from the week.

What might be toward, that this sweaty haste

Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day:

Who is’t that can inform me?


That can ;

At least, the whisper goes so. Our last King,

Whose image even but now appear’d to us,

Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,

Thereto prick’d on by a most emulate pride,

Dar’d to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet,

For so this side of our known world esteem’d him,

Did slay this Fortinbras; who by a seal’d compact,

Well ratified by law and heraldry,

Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands

Which he stood seiz’d of, to the conqueror;

Against the which, a moiety competent

Was gaged by our King; which had return’d

To the inheritance of Fortinbras,

Had he been vanquisher; as by the same cov’nant

And carriage of the article design’d,

His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,

Of unimproved mettle, hot and full,

Hath in the skirts of Norway, here and there,

Shark’d up a list of lawless resolutes,

For food and diet, to some enterprise

That hath a stomach in’t; which is no other,

As it doth well appear unto our state,

But to recover of us by strong hand

And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands

So by his father lost. And this,  take it,

Is the main motive of our preparations,

The source of this our watch, and the chief head

Of this post-haste and rummage in the land.


think it be no other but e’en so:

Well may it sort that this portentous figure

Comes armed through our watch so like the King

That was and is the question of these wars.


mote it is to trouble the mind’s eye.

In the most high and palmy state of Rome,

little ere the mightiest Julius fell,

The graves stood tenantless and the sheeted dead

Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets;

As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,

Disasters in the sun; and the moist star,

Upon whose influence Neptune’s empire stands,

Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse.

And even the like precurse of fierce events,

As harbingers preceding still the fates

And prologue to the omen coming on,

Have heaven and earth together demonstrated

Unto our climatures and countrymen.

Re-enter Ghost.

But, soft, behold! Lo, where it comes again!

’ll cross it, though it blast me. Stay, illusion!

If thou hast any sound, or use of voice,

Speak to me.

If there be any good thing to be done,

That may to thee do ease, and grace to me,

Speak to me.

If thou art privy to thy country’s fate,

Which, happily, foreknowing may avoid,

speak!

Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life

Extorted treasure in the womb of earth,

For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death,

Speak of it. Stay, and speak!


Stop it, Marcellus!


Shall  strike at it with my partisan?


Do, if it will not stand.


’Tis here!


’Tis here!



’Tis gone!

We do it wrong, being so majestical,

To offer it the show of violence,

For it is as the air, invulnerable,

And our vain blows malicious mockery.


It was about to speak, when the cock crew.


And then it started, like a guilty thing

Upon a fearful summons.  have heard

The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,

Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat

Awake the god of day; and at his warning,

Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,

Th’extravagant and erring spirit hies

To his confine. And of the truth herein

This present object made probation.


It faded on the crowing of the cock.

Some say that ever ’gainst that season comes

Wherein our Saviour’s birth is celebrated,

The bird of dawning singeth all night long;

And then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad,

The nights are wholesome, then no planets strike,

No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm;

So hallow’d and so gracious is the time.


So have  heard, and do in part believe it.

But look, the morn in russet mantle clad,

Walks o’er the dew of yon high eastward hill.

Break we our watch up, and by my advice,

Let us impart what we have seen tonight

Unto young Hamlet; for upon my life,

This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.

Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it,

As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?


Let’s do’t,  pray, and  this morning know

Where we shall find him most conveniently.


Elsinore.  room of state in the Castle.


Laertes, Voltemand,

Cornelius, Lords and Attendant.


Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother’s death

The memory be green, and that it us befitted

To bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom

To be contracted in one brow of woe;

Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature

That we with wisest sorrow think on him,

Together with remembrance of ourselves.

Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,

Th’imperial jointress to this warlike state,

Have we, as ’twere with a defeated joy,

With one auspicious and one dropping eye,

With mirth in funeral, and with dirge in marriage,

In equal scale weighing delight and dole,

Taken to wife; nor have we herein barr’d

Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone

With this affair along. For all, our thanks.

Now follows, that you know young Fortinbras,

Holding a weak supposal of our worth,

Or thinking by our late dear brother’s death

Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,

Colleagued with this dream of his advantage,

He hath not fail’d to pester us with message,

Importing the surrender of those lands

Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,

To our most valiant brother. So much for him.

Now for ourself and for this time of meeting:

Thus much the business is: we have here writ

To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,

Who, impotent and bed-rid, scarcely hears

Of this his nephew’s purpose, to suppress

His further gait herein; in that the levies,

The lists, and full proportions are all made

Out of his subject: and we here dispatch

You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltemand,

For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,

Giving to you no further personal powe
To business with the King, more than the scope

Of these dilated articles allow.

Farewell; and let your haste commend your duty.

and 

In that, and all things, will we show our duty.


We doubt it nothing: heartily farewell.


And now, Laertes, what’s the news with you?

You told us of some suit. What is’t, Laertes?

You cannot speak of reason to the Dane,

And lose your voice. What wouldst thou beg, Laertes,

That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?

The head is not more native to the heart,

The hand more instrumental to the mouth,

Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.

What wouldst thou have, Laertes?


Dread my lord,

Your leave and favour to return to France,

From whence though willingly  came to Denmark

To show my duty in your coronation;

Yet now  must confess, that duty done,

My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France,

And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.


Have you your father’s leave? What says Polonius?


He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave

By laboursome petition; and at last

Upon his will  seal’d my hard consent.

do beseech you give him leave to go.


Take thy fair hour, Laertes; time be thine,

And thy best graces spend it at thy will!

But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son—


little more than kin, and less than kind.


How is it that the clouds still hang on you?


Not so, my lord,  am too much i’ the sun.


Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off,

And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.

Do not for ever with thy vailed lids

Seek for thy noble father in the dust.

Thou know’st ’tis common, all that lives must die,

Passing through nature to eternity.


Ay, madam, it is common.


If it be,

Why seems it so particular with thee?


Seems, madam! Nay, it is;  know not seems.

’Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,

Nor customary suits of solemn black,

Nor windy suspiration of forc’d breath,

No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,

Nor the dejected haviour of the visage,

Together with all forms, moods, shows of grief,

That can denote me truly. These indeed seem,

For they are actions that a man might play;

But  have that within which passeth show;

These but the trappings and the suits of woe.


’Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet,

To give these mourning duties to your father;

But you must know, your father lost a father,

That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound

In filial obligation, for some term

To do obsequious sorrow. But to persevere

In obstinate condolement is a course

Of impious stubbornness. ’Tis unmanly grief,

It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,

heart unfortified, a mind impatient,

An understanding simple and unschool’d;

For what we know must be, and is as common

As any the most vulgar thing to sense,

Why should we in our peevish opposition

Take it to heart? Fie, ’tis a fault to heaven,

fault against the dead, a fault to nature,

To reason most absurd, whose common theme

Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,

From the first corse till he that died today,

‘This must be so.’ We pray you throw to earth

This unprevailing woe, and think of us

As of a father; for let the world take note

You are the most immediate to our throne,

And with no less nobility of love

Than that which dearest father bears his son

Do  impart toward you. For your intent

In going back to school in Wittenberg,

It is most retrograde to our desire:

And we beseech you bend you to remain

Here in the cheer and comfort of our eye,

Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.


Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet.

pray thee stay with us; go not to Wittenberg.


shall in all my best obey you, madam.


Why, ’tis a loving and a fair reply.

Be as ourself in Denmark. Madam, come;

This gentle and unforc’d accord of Hamlet

Sits smiling to my heart; in grace whereof,

No jocund health that Denmark drinks today

But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,

And the King’s rouse the heaven shall bruit again,

Re-speaking earthly thunder. Come away.



that this too too solid flesh would melt,

Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew!

Or that the Everlasting had not fix’d

His canon ’gainst self-slaughter.  God!  God!

How weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable

Seem to me all the uses of this world!

Fie on’t! Oh fie! ’tis an unweeded garden

That grows to seed; things rank and gross in nature

Possess it merely. That it should come to this!

But two months dead—nay, not so much, not two:

So excellent a king; that was to this

Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother,

That he might not beteem the winds of heaven

Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth!

Must  remember? Why, she would hang on him

As if increase of appetite had grown

By what it fed on; and yet, within a month—

Let me not think on’t—Frailty, thy name is woman!

little month, or ere those shoes were old

With which she followed my poor father’s body

Like Niobe, all tears.—Why she, even she—

God!  beast that wants discourse of reason

Would have mourn’d longer,—married with mine uncle,

My father’s brother; but no more like my fathe
Than  to Hercules. Within a month?

Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears

Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,

She married.  most wicked speed, to post

With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!

It is not, nor it cannot come to good.

But break my heart, for  must hold my tongue.



Hail to your lordship!


am glad to see you well:

Horatio, or  do forget myself.


The same, my lord,

And your poor servant ever.


Sir, my good friend;

’ll change that name with you:

And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio?—

Marcellus?


My good lord.


am very glad to see you.—Good even, sir.—

But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?


truant disposition, good my lord.


would not hear your enemy say so;

Nor shall you do my ear that violence,

To make it truster of your own report

Against yourself.  know you are no truant.

But what is your affair in Elsinore?

We’ll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.


My lord,  came to see your father’s funeral.


prithee do not mock me, fellow-student.

think it was to see my mother’s wedding.


Indeed, my lord, it follow’d hard upon.


Thrift, thrift, Horatio! The funeral bak’d meats

Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.

Would  had met my dearest foe in heaven

Or ever  had seen that day, Horatio.

My father,—methinks  see my father.


Where, my lord?


In my mind’s eye, Horatio.


saw him once; he was a goodly king.


He was a man, take him for all in all,

shall not look upon his like again.


My lord,  think  saw him yesternight.


Saw? Who?


My lord, the King your father.


The King my father!


Season your admiration for a while

With an attent ear, till  may delive
Upon the witness of these gentlemen

This marvel to you.


For God’s love let me hear.


Two nights together had these gentlemen,

Marcellus and Barnardo, on their watch

In the dead waste and middle of the night,

Been thus encounter’d.  figure like your father,

Armed at point exactly, cap-à-pie,

Appears before them, and with solemn march

Goes slow and stately by them: thrice he walk’d

By their oppress’d and fear-surprised eyes,

Within his truncheon’s length; whilst they, distill’d

Almost to jelly with the act of fear,

Stand dumb, and speak not to him. This to me

In dreadful secrecy impart they did,

And  with them the third night kept the watch,

Where, as they had deliver’d, both in time,

Form of the thing, each word made true and good,

The apparition comes.  knew your father;

These hands are not more like.


But where was this?


My lord, upon the platform where we watch.


Did you not speak to it?


My lord,  did;

But answer made it none: yet once methought

It lifted up it head, and did address

Itself to motion, like as it would speak.

But even then the morning cock crew loud,

And at the sound it shrunk in haste away,

And vanish’d from our sight.


’Tis very strange.


As  do live, my honour’d lord, ’tis true;

And we did think it writ down in our duty

To let you know of it.


Indeed, indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.

Hold you the watch tonight?

and 

We do, my lord.


Arm’d, say you?

Both.

Arm’d, my lord.


From top to toe?


My lord, from head to foot.


Then saw you not his face?


yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up.


What, look’d he frowningly?


countenance more in sorrow than in anger.


Pale, or red?


Nay, very pale.


And fix’d his eyes upon you?


Most constantly.


would  had been there.


It would have much amaz’d you.


Very like, very like. Stay’d it long?


While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.

and 

Longer, longer.


Not when  saw’t.


His beard was grizzled, no?


It was, as  have seen it in his life,

sable silver’d.


will watch tonight;

Perchance ’twill walk again.


warrant you it will.


If it assume my noble father’s person,

’ll speak to it, though hell itself should gape

And bid me hold my peace.  pray you all,

If you have hitherto conceal’d this sight,

Let it be tenable in your silence still;

And whatsoever else shall hap tonight,

Give it an understanding, but no tongue.

will requite your loves. So, fare ye well.

Upon the platform ’twixt eleven and twelve,

’ll visit you.


Our duty to your honour.


Your loves, as mine to you: farewell.


My father’s spirit in arms! All is not well;

doubt some foul play: would the night were come!

Till then sit still, my soul: foul deeds will rise,

Though all the earth o’erwhelm them, to men’s eyes.


room in Polonius’s house.



My necessaries are embark’d. Farewell.

And, sister, as the winds give benefit

And convoy is assistant, do not sleep,

But let me hear from you.


Do you doubt that?


For Hamlet, and the trifling of his favour,

Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood;

violet in the youth of primy nature,

Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting;

The perfume and suppliance of a minute;

No more.


No more but so?


Think it no more.

For nature crescent does not grow alone

In thews and bulk; but as this temple waxes,

The inward service of the mind and soul

Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,

And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch

The virtue of his will; but you must fear,

His greatness weigh’d, his will is not his own;

For he himself is subject to his birth:

He may not, as unvalu’d persons do,

Carve for himself; for on his choice depends

The sanctity and health of this whole state;

And therefore must his choice be circumscrib’d

Unto the voice and yielding of that body

Whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you,

It fits your wisdom so far to believe it

As he in his particular act and place

May give his saying deed; which is no furthe
Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.

Then weigh what loss your honour may sustain

If with too credent ear you list his songs,

Or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open

To his unmaster’d importunity.

Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister;

And keep you in the rear of your affection,

Out of the shot and danger of desire.

The chariest maid is prodigal enough

If she unmask her beauty to the moon.

Virtue itself scopes not calumnious strokes:

The canker galls the infants of the spring

Too oft before their buttons be disclos’d,

And in the morn and liquid dew of youth

Contagious blastments are most imminent.

Be wary then, best safety lies in fear.

Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.


shall th’effect of this good lesson keep

As watchman to my heart. But good my brother,

Do not as some ungracious pastors do,

Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven;

Whilst like a puff’d and reckless libertine

Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads,

And recks not his own rede.


, fear me not.

stay too long. But here my father comes.


double blessing is a double grace;

Occasion smiles upon a second leave.


Yet here, Laertes? Aboard, aboard, for shame.

The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,

And you are stay’d for. There, my blessing with you.


And these few precepts in thy memory

Look thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,

Nor any unproportion’d thought his act.

Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.

Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,

Grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel;

But do not dull thy palm with entertainment

Of each new-hatch’d, unfledg’d comrade. Beware

Of entrance to a quarrel; but being in,

Bear’t that th’opposed may beware of thee.

Give every man thine ear, but few thy voice:

Take each man’s censure, but reserve thy judgment.

Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,

But not express’d in fancy; rich, not gaudy:

For the apparel oft proclaims the man;

And they in France of the best rank and station

Are of a most select and generous chief in that.

Neither a borrower nor a lender be:

For loan oft loses both itself and friend;

And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.

This above all: to thine own self be true;

And it must follow, as the night the day,

Thou canst not then be false to any man.

Farewell: my blessing season this in thee.


Most humbly do  take my leave, my lord.


The time invites you; go, your servants tend.


Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well

What  have said to you.


’Tis in my memory lock’d,

And you yourself shall keep the key of it.


Farewell.



What is’t, Ophelia, he hath said to you?


So please you, something touching the Lord Hamlet.


Marry, well bethought:

’Tis told me he hath very oft of late

Given private time to you; and you yourself

Have of your audience been most free and bounteous.

If it be so,—as so ’tis put on me,

And that in way of caution,— must tell you

You do not understand yourself so clearly

As it behoves my daughter and your honour.

What is between you? Give me up the truth.


He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders

Of his affection to me.


Affection! Pooh! You speak like a green girl,

Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.

Do you believe his tenders, as you call them?


do not know, my lord, what  should think.


Marry, ’ll teach you; think yourself a baby;

That you have ta’en these tenders for true pay,

Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly;

Or,—not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,

Roaming it thus,—you’ll tender me a fool.


My lord, he hath importun’d me with love

In honourable fashion.


Ay, fashion you may call it; go to, go to.


And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,

With almost all the holy vows of heaven.


Ay, springes to catch woodcocks.  do know,

When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul

Lends the tongue vows: these blazes, daughter,

Giving more light than heat, extinct in both,

Even in their promise, as it is a-making,

You must not take for fire. From this time

Be something scanter of your maiden presence;

Set your entreatments at a higher rate

Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet,

Believe so much in him that he is young;

And with a larger tether may he walk

Than may be given you. In few, Ophelia,

Do not believe his vows; for they are brokers,

Not of that dye which their investments show,

But mere implorators of unholy suits,

Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds,

The better to beguile. This is for all.

would not, in plain terms, from this time forth

Have you so slander any moment leisure

As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.

Look to’t,  charge you; come your ways.


shall obey, my lord.


The platform.



The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.


It is a nipping and an eager air.


What hour now?


think it lacks of twelve.


No, it is struck.


Indeed?  heard it not. It then draws near the season

Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.


What does this mean, my lord?


The King doth wake tonight and takes his rouse,

Keeps wassail, and the swaggering upspring reels;

And as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,

The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out

The triumph of his pledge.


Is it a custom?


Ay marry is’t;

And to my mind, though  am native here,

And to the manner born, it is a custom

More honour’d in the breach than the observance.

This heavy-headed revel east and west

Makes us traduc’d and tax’d of other nations:

They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase

Soil our addition; and indeed it takes

From our achievements, though perform’d at height,

The pith and marrow of our attribute.

So oft it chances in particular men

That for some vicious mole of nature in them,

As in their birth, wherein they are not guilty,

Since nature cannot choose his origin,

By their o’ergrowth of some complexion,

Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason;

Or by some habit, that too much o’erleavens

The form of plausive manners;—that these men,

Carrying,  say, the stamp of one defect,

Being Nature’s livery or Fortune’s star,—

His virtues else,—be they as pure as grace,

As infinite as man may undergo,

Shall in the general censure take corruption

From that particular fault. The dram of evil

Doth all the noble substance often doubt

To his own scandal.


Look, my lord, it comes!



Angels and ministers of grace defend us!

Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damn’d,

Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell,

Be thy intents wicked or charitable,

Thou com’st in such a questionable shape

That  will speak to thee. ’ll call thee Hamlet,

King, father, royal Dane. , answer me!

Let me not burst in ignorance; but tell

Why thy canoniz’d bones, hearsed in death,

Have burst their cerements; why the sepulchre,

Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn’d,

Hath op’d his ponderous and marble jaws

To cast thee up again! What may this mean,

That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel,

Revisit’st thus the glimpses of the moon,

Making night hideous, and we fools of nature

So horridly to shake our disposition

With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?

Say, why is this? Wherefore? What should we do?



It beckons you to go away with it,

As if it some impartment did desire

To you alone.


Look with what courteous action

It waves you to a more removed ground.

But do not go with it.


No, by no means.


It will not speak; then will  follow it.


Do not, my lord.


Why, what should be the fear?

do not set my life at a pin’s fee;

And for my soul, what can it do to that,

Being a thing immortal as itself?

It waves me forth again. ’ll follow it.


What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord,

Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff

That beetles o’er his base into the sea,

And there assume some other horrible form

Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason,

And draw you into madness? Think of it.

The very place puts toys of desperation,

Without more motive, into every brain

That looks so many fadoms to the sea

And hears it roar beneath.


It waves me still.

Go on, ’ll follow thee.


You shall not go, my lord.


Hold off your hands.


Be rul’d; you shall not go.


My fate cries out,

And makes each petty artery in this body

As hardy as the Nemean lion’s nerve.


Still am  call’d. Unhand me, gentlemen.


By heaven, ’ll make a ghost of him that lets me.

say, away!—Go on, ’ll follow thee.



He waxes desperate with imagination.


Let’s follow; ’tis not fit thus to obey him.


Have after. To what issue will this come?


Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.


Heaven will direct it.


Nay, let’s follow him.


.  more remote part of the Castle.



Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak, ’ll go no further.


Mark me.


will.


My hour is almost come,

When  to sulph’rous and tormenting flames

Must render up myself.


Alas, poor ghost!


Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing

To what  shall unfold.


Speak,  am bound to hear.


So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.


What?


am thy father’s spirit,

Doom’d for a certain term to walk the night,

And for the day confin’d to fast in fires,

Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature

Are burnt and purg’d away. But that  am forbid

To tell the secrets of my prison-house,

could a tale unfold whose lightest word

Would harrow up thy soul; freeze thy young blood,

Make thy two eyes like stars start from their spheres,

Thy knotted and combined locks to part,

And each particular hair to stand on end

Like quills upon the fretful porcupine.

But this eternal blazon must not be

To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, , list!

If thou didst ever thy dear father love—


God!


Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.


Murder!


Murder most foul, as in the best it is;

But this most foul, strange, and unnatural.


Haste me to know’t, that , with wings as swift

As meditation or the thoughts of love

May sweep to my revenge.


find thee apt;

And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed

That rots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,

Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear.

’Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,

serpent stung me; so the whole ear of Denmark

Is by a forged process of my death

Rankly abus’d; but know, thou noble youth,

The serpent that did sting thy father’s life

Now wears his crown.


my prophetic soul!

Mine uncle!


Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,

With witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts,—

wicked wit, and gifts, that have the powe
So to seduce!—won to his shameful lust

The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen.

Hamlet, what a falling off was there,

From me, whose love was of that dignity

That it went hand in hand even with the vow

made to her in marriage; and to decline

Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poo
To those of mine. But virtue, as it never will be mov’d,

Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven;

So lust, though to a radiant angel link’d,

Will sate itself in a celestial bed

And prey on garbage.

But soft! methinks  scent the morning air;

Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,

My custom always of the afternoon,

Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole

With juice of cursed hebenon in a vial,

And in the porches of my ears did pou
The leperous distilment, whose effect

Holds such an enmity with blood of man

That swift as quicksilver it courses through

The natural gates and alleys of the body;

And with a sudden vigour it doth posset

And curd, like eager droppings into milk,

The thin and wholesome blood. So did it mine;

And a most instant tetter bark’d about,

Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust

All my smooth body.

Thus was , sleeping, by a brother’s hand,

Of life, of crown, of queen at once dispatch’d:

Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin,

Unhous’led, disappointed, unanel’d;

No reckoning made, but sent to my account

With all my imperfections on my head.

horrible!  horrible! most horrible!

If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not;

Let not the royal bed of Denmark be

couch for luxury and damned incest.

But howsoever thou pursu’st this act,

Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive

Against thy mother aught; leave her to heaven,

And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge,

To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once!

The glow-worm shows the matin to be near,

And ’gins to pale his uneffectual fire.

Adieu, adieu, adieu. Hamlet, remember me.



all you host of heaven!  earth! What else?

And shall  couple hell? , fie! Hold, my heart;

And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,

But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee?

Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seat

In this distracted globe. Remember thee?

Yea, from the table of my memory

’ll wipe away all trivial fond records,

All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,

That youth and observation copied there;

And thy commandment all alone shall live

Within the book and volume of my brain,

Unmix’d with baser matter. Yes, by heaven!

most pernicious woman!

villain, villain, smiling damned villain!

My tables. Meet it is  set it down,

That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain!

At least  am sure it may be so in Denmark.


So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word;

It is ‘Adieu, adieu, remember me.’

have sworn’t.

and 

My lord, my lord.


Lord Hamlet.


Heaven secure him.


So be it!


Illo, ho, ho, my lord!


Hillo, ho, ho, boy! Come, bird, come.



How is’t, my noble lord?


What news, my lord?


, wonderful!


Good my lord, tell it.


No, you’ll reveal it.


Not , my lord, by heaven.


Nor , my lord.


How say you then, would heart of man once think it?—

But you’ll be secret?

and 

Ay, by heaven, my lord.


There’s ne’er a villain dwelling in all Denmark

But he’s an arrant knave.


There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave

To tell us this.


Why, right; you are i’ the right;

And so, without more circumstance at all,

hold it fit that we shake hands and part:

You, as your business and desires shall point you,—

For every man hath business and desire,

Such as it is;—and for my own poor part,

Look you, ’ll go pray.


These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.


’m sorry they offend you, heartily;

Yes faith, heartily.


There’s no offence, my lord.


Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,

And much offence too. Touching this vision here,

It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you.

For your desire to know what is between us,

’ermaster’t as you may. And now, good friends,

As you are friends, scholars, and soldiers,

Give me one poor request.


What is’t, my lord? We will.


Never make known what you have seen tonight.

and 

My lord, we will not.


Nay, but swear’t.


In faith, my lord, not .


Nor , my lord, in faith.


Upon my sword.


We have sworn, my lord, already.


Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.


Swear.


Ha, ha boy, say’st thou so? Art thou there, truepenny?

Come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarage.

Consent to swear.


Propose the oath, my lord.


Never to speak of this that you have seen.

Swear by my sword.


Swear.


_Hic et ubique?_ Then we’ll shift our ground.

Come hither, gentlemen,

And lay your hands again upon my sword.

Never to speak of this that you have heard.

Swear by my sword.


Swear.


Well said, old mole! Canst work i’ th’earth so fast?

worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.


day and night, but this is wondrous strange.


And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.

There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,

Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come,

Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,

How strange or odd soe’er  bear myself,—

As  perchance hereafter shall think meet

To put an antic disposition on—

That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,

With arms encumber’d thus, or this head-shake,

Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,

As ‘Well, we know’, or ‘We could and if we would’,

Or ‘If we list to speak’; or ‘There be and if they might’,

Or such ambiguous giving out, to note

That you know aught of me:—this not to do.

So grace and mercy at your most need help you,

Swear.


Swear.


Rest, rest, perturbed spirit. So, gentlemen,

With all my love  do commend me to you;

And what so poor a man as Hamlet is

May do t’express his love and friending to you,

God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together,

And still your fingers on your lips,  pray.

The time is out of joint.  cursed spite,

That ever  was born to set it right.

Nay, come, let’s go together.



.  room in Polonius’s house.



Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.


will, my lord.


You shall do marvellous wisely, good Reynaldo,

Before you visit him, to make inquiry

Of his behaviour.


My lord,  did intend it.


Marry, well said; very well said. Look you, sir,

Enquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;

And how, and who, what means, and where they keep,

What company, at what expense; and finding

By this encompassment and drift of question,

That they do know my son, come you more neare
Than your particular demands will touch it.

Take you as ’twere some distant knowledge of him,

As thus, ‘ know his father and his friends,

And in part him’—do you mark this, Reynaldo?


Ay, very well, my lord.


‘And in part him, but,’ you may say, ‘not well;

But if’t be he  mean, he’s very wild;

Addicted so and so;’ and there put on him

What forgeries you please; marry, none so rank

As may dishonour him; take heed of that;

But, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips

As are companions noted and most known

To youth and liberty.


As gaming, my lord?


Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing,

Quarrelling, drabbing. You may go so far.


My lord, that would dishonour him.


Faith no, as you may season it in the charge.

You must not put another scandal on him,

That he is open to incontinency;

That’s not my meaning: but breathe his faults so quaintly

That they may seem the taints of liberty;

The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,

savageness in unreclaimed blood,

Of general assault.


But my good lord—


Wherefore should you do this?


Ay, my lord,  would know that.


Marry, sir, here’s my drift,

And  believe it is a fetch of warrant.

You laying these slight sullies on my son,

As ’twere a thing a little soil’d i’ th’ working,

Mark you,

Your party in converse, him you would sound,

Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes

The youth you breathe of guilty, be assur’d

He closes with you in this consequence;

‘Good sir,’ or so; or ‘friend,’ or ‘gentleman’—

According to the phrase or the addition

Of man and country.


Very good, my lord.


And then, sir, does he this,—

He does—What was  about to say?

By the mass,  was about to say something. Where did  leave?


At ‘closes in the consequence.’

At ‘friend or so,’ and ‘gentleman.’


At ‘closes in the consequence’ ay, marry!

He closes with you thus: ‘ know the gentleman,

saw him yesterday, or t’other day,

Or then, or then, with such and such; and, as you say,

There was he gaming, there o’ertook in’s rouse,

There falling out at tennis’: or perchance,

‘ saw him enter such a house of sale’—

_Videlicet_, a brothel, or so forth. See you now;

Your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth;

And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,

With windlasses, and with assays of bias,

By indirections find directions out.

So by my former lecture and advice

Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?


My lord,  have.


God b’ wi’ you, fare you well.


Good my lord.


Observe his inclination in yourself.


shall, my lord.


And let him ply his music.


Well, my lord.


Farewell.



How now, Ophelia, what’s the matter?


Alas, my lord,  have been so affrighted.


With what, in the name of God?


My lord, as  was sewing in my chamber,

Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbrac’d,

No hat upon his head, his stockings foul’d,

Ungart’red, and down-gyved to his ankle,

Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,

And with a look so piteous in purport

As if he had been loosed out of hell

To speak of horrors, he comes before me.


Mad for thy love?


My lord,  do not know, but truly  do fear it.


What said he?


He took me by the wrist and held me hard;

Then goes he to the length of all his arm;

And with his other hand thus o’er his brow,

He falls to such perusal of my face

As he would draw it. Long stay’d he so,

At last,—a little shaking of mine arm,

And thrice his head thus waving up and down,

He rais’d a sigh so piteous and profound

As it did seem to shatter all his bulk

And end his being. That done, he lets me go,

And with his head over his shoulder turn’d

He seem’d to find his way without his eyes,

For out o’ doors he went without their help,

And to the last bended their light on me.


Come, go with me.  will go seek the King.

This is the very ecstasy of love,

Whose violent property fordoes itself,

And leads the will to desperate undertakings,

As oft as any passion under heaven

That does afflict our natures.  am sorry,—

What, have you given him any hard words of late?


No, my good lord; but as you did command,

did repel his letters and denied

His access to me.


That hath made him mad.

am sorry that with better heed and judgment

had not quoted him.  fear’d he did but trifle,

And meant to wreck thee. But beshrew my jealousy!

It seems it is as proper to our age

To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions

As it is common for the younger sort

To lack discretion. Come, go we to the King.

This must be known, which, being kept close, might move

More grief to hide than hate to utter love.


room in the Castle.



Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

Moreover that we much did long to see you,

The need we have to use you did provoke

Our hasty sending. Something have you heard

Of Hamlet’s transformation; so  call it,

Since nor th’exterior nor the inward man

Resembles that it was. What it should be,

More than his father’s death, that thus hath put him

So much from th’understanding of himself,

cannot dream of.  entreat you both

That, being of so young days brought up with him,

And since so neighbour’d to his youth and humour,

That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court

Some little time, so by your companies

To draw him on to pleasures and to gather,

So much as from occasion you may glean,

Whether aught to us unknown afflicts him thus

That, open’d, lies within our remedy.


Good gentlemen, he hath much talk’d of you,

And sure  am, two men there are not living

To whom he more adheres. If it will please you

To show us so much gentry and good will

As to expend your time with us awhile,

For the supply and profit of our hope,

Your visitation shall receive such thanks

As fits a king’s remembrance.


Both your majesties

Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,

Put your dread pleasures more into command

Than to entreaty.


We both obey,

And here give up ourselves, in the full bent,

To lay our service freely at your feet

To be commanded.


Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.


Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz.

And  beseech you instantly to visit

My too much changed son. Go, some of you,

And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.


Heavens make our presence and our practices

Pleasant and helpful to him.


Ay, amen.




Th’ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,

Are joyfully return’d.


Thou still hast been the father of good news.


Have , my lord? Assure you, my good liege,

hold my duty, as  hold my soul,

Both to my God and to my gracious King:

And  do think,—or else this brain of mine

Hunts not the trail of policy so sure

As it hath us’d to do—that  have found

The very cause of Hamlet’s lunacy.


speak of that, that do  long to hear.


Give first admittance to th’ambassadors;

My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.


Thyself do grace to them, and bring them in.


He tells me, my sweet queen, that he hath found

The head and source of all your son’s distemper.


doubt it is no other but the main,

His father’s death and our o’erhasty marriage.


Well, we shall sift him.


Welcome, my good friends!

Say, Voltemand, what from our brother Norway?


Most fair return of greetings and desires.

Upon our first, he sent out to suppress

His nephew’s levies, which to him appear’d

To be a preparation ’gainst the Polack;

But better look’d into, he truly found

It was against your Highness; whereat griev’d,

That so his sickness, age, and impotence

Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests

On Fortinbras; which he, in brief, obeys,

Receives rebuke from Norway; and in fine,

Makes vow before his uncle never more

To give th’assay of arms against your Majesty.

Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,

Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee,

And his commission to employ those soldiers

So levied as before, against the Polack:

With an entreaty, herein further shown,


That it might please you to give quiet pass

Through your dominions for this enterprise,

On such regards of safety and allowance

As therein are set down.


It likes us well;

And at our more consider’d time we’ll read,

Answer, and think upon this business.

Meantime we thank you for your well-took labour.

Go to your rest, at night we’ll feast together:.

Most welcome home.



This business is well ended.

My liege and madam, to expostulate

What majesty should be, what duty is,

Why day is day, night night, and time is time

Were nothing but to waste night, day and time.

Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,

And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,

will be brief. Your noble son is mad.

Mad call  it; for to define true madness,

What is’t but to be nothing else but mad?

But let that go.


More matter, with less art.


Madam,  swear  use no art at all.

That he is mad, ’tis true: ’tis true ’tis pity;

And pity ’tis ’tis true.  foolish figure,

But farewell it, for  will use no art.

Mad let us grant him then. And now remains

That we find out the cause of this effect,

Or rather say, the cause of this defect,

For this effect defective comes by cause.

Thus it remains, and the remainder thus. Perpend,

have a daughter—have whilst she is mine—

Who in her duty and obedience, mark,

Hath given me this. Now gather, and surmise.


_To the celestial, and my soul’s idol, the most beautified Ophelia_—

That’s an ill phrase, a vile phrase; ‘beautified’ is a vile

phrase: but you shall hear.


_these; in her excellent white bosom, these, &c._


Came this from Hamlet to her?


Good madam, stay awhile;  will be faithful.


_Doubt thou the stars are fire,

Doubt that the sun doth move,

Doubt truth to be a liar,

But never doubt  love.

dear Ophelia,  am ill at these numbers.  have not art to reckon my

groans. But that  love thee best,  most best, believe it. Adieu.

Thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst this machine is to him,

_

This in obedience hath my daughter show’d me;

And more above, hath his solicitings,

As they fell out by time, by means, and place,

All given to mine ear.


But how hath she receiv’d his love?


What do you think of me?


As of a man faithful and honourable.


would fain prove so. But what might you think,

When  had seen this hot love on the wing,

As  perceiv’d it,  must tell you that,

Before my daughter told me, what might you,

Or my dear Majesty your queen here, think,

If  had play’d the desk or table-book,

Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,

Or look’d upon this love with idle sight,

What might you think? No,  went round to work,

And my young mistress thus  did bespeak:

‘Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star.

This must not be.’ And then  precepts gave her,

That she should lock herself from his resort,

Admit no messengers, receive no tokens.

Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,

And he, repulsed,—a short tale to make—

Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,

Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,

Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,

Into the madness wherein now he raves,

And all we wail for.


Do you think ’tis this?


It may be, very likely.


Hath there been such a time, ’d fain know that,

That  have positively said ‘’Tis so,’

When it prov’d otherwise?


Not that  know.


Take this from this, if this be otherwise.


If circumstances lead me,  will find

Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed

Within the centre.


How may we try it further?


You know sometimes he walks four hours togethe
Here in the lobby.


So he does indeed.


At such a time ’ll loose my daughter to him.

Be you and  behind an arras then,

Mark the encounter. If he love her not,

And be not from his reason fall’n thereon,

Let me be no assistant for a state,

But keep a farm and carters.


We will try it.



But look where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.


Away,  do beseech you, both away

’ll board him presently. , give me leave.


How does my good Lord Hamlet?


Well, God-a-mercy.


Do you know me, my lord?


Excellent well. You’re a fishmonger.


Not , my lord.


Then  would you were so honest a man.


Honest, my lord?


Ay sir, to be honest, as this world goes, is to be one man picked out

of ten thousand.


That’s very true, my lord.


For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a good kissing

carrion,—

Have you a daughter?


have, my lord.


Let her not walk i’ th’ sun. Conception is a blessing, but not as you
daughter may conceive. Friend, look to’t.


How say you by that?  Still harping on my daughter. Yet he

knew me not at first; he said  was a fishmonger. He is far gone, fa
gone. And truly in my youth  suffered much extremity for love; very

near this. ’ll speak to him again.—What do you read, my lord?


Words, words, words.


What is the matter, my lord?


Between who?


mean the matter that you read, my lord.


Slanders, sir. For the satirical slave says here that old men have grey

beards; that their faces are wrinkled; their eyes purging thick ambe
and plum-tree gum; and that they have a plentiful lack of wit, togethe
with most weak hams. All which, sir, though  most powerfully and

potently believe, yet  hold it not honesty to have it thus set down.

For you yourself, sir, should be old as  am, if like a crab you could

go backward.


Though this be madness, yet there is a method in’t.—

Will you walk out of the air, my lord?


Into my grave?


Indeed, that is out o’ the air.  How pregnant sometimes his

replies are!  happiness that often madness hits on, which reason and

sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of.  will leave him and

suddenly contrive the means of meeting between him and my daughter.

My honourable lord,  will most humbly take my leave of you.


You cannot, sir, take from me anything that  will more willingly part

withal, except my life, except my life, except my life.


Fare you well, my lord.


These tedious old fools.



You go to seek the Lord Hamlet; there he is.


God save you, sir.



My honoured lord!


My most dear lord!


My excellent good friends! How dost thou, Guildenstern? Ah,

Rosencrantz. Good lads, how do ye both?


As the indifferent children of the earth.


Happy in that we are not over-happy;

On Fortune’s cap we are not the very button.


Nor the soles of her shoe?


Neither, my lord.


Then you live about her waist, or in the middle of her favours?


Faith, her privates we.


In the secret parts of Fortune? , most true; she is a strumpet. What’s

the news?


None, my lord, but that the world’s grown honest.


Then is doomsday near. But your news is not true. Let me question more

in particular. What have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of

Fortune, that she sends you to prison hither?


Prison, my lord?


Denmark’s a prison.


Then is the world one.


goodly one; in which there are many confines, wards, and dungeons,

Denmark being one o’ th’ worst.


We think not so, my lord.


Why, then ’tis none to you; for there is nothing either good or bad but

thinking makes it so. To me it is a prison.


Why, then your ambition makes it one; ’tis too narrow for your mind.


God,  could be bounded in a nutshell, and count myself a king of

infinite space, were it not that  have bad dreams.


Which dreams, indeed, are ambition; for the very substance of the

ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream.


dream itself is but a shadow.


Truly, and  hold ambition of so airy and light a quality that it is

but a shadow’s shadow.


Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and outstretch’d heroes

the beggars’ shadows. Shall we to th’ court? For, by my fay,  cannot

reason.

and 

We’ll wait upon you.


No such matter.  will not sort you with the rest of my servants; for,

to speak to you like an honest man,  am most dreadfully attended. But,

in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at Elsinore?


To visit you, my lord, no other occasion.


Beggar that  am,  am even poor in thanks; but  thank you. And sure,

dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny. Were you not sent

for? Is it your own inclining? Is it a free visitation? Come, deal

justly with me. Come, come; nay, speak.


What should we say, my lord?


Why, anything. But to the purpose. You were sent for; and there is a

kind of confession in your looks, which your modesties have not craft

enough to colour.  know the good King and Queen have sent for you.


To what end, my lord?


That you must teach me. But let me conjure you, by the rights of ou
fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the obligation of ou
ever-preserved love, and by what more dear a better proposer could

charge you withal, be even and direct with me, whether you were sent

for or no.


What say you?


Nay, then  have an eye of you. If you love me, hold not

off.


My lord, we were sent for.


will tell you why; so shall my anticipation prevent your discovery,

and your secrecy to the King and Queen moult no feather.  have of

late, but wherefore  know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all custom

of exercises; and indeed, it goes so heavily with my disposition that

this goodly frame the earth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this

most excellent canopy the air, look you, this brave o’erhanging

firmament, this majestical roof fretted with golden fire, why, it

appears no other thing to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of

vapours. What a piece of work is man, how noble in reason, how infinite

in faculties, in form and moving, how express and admirable; in action

how like an angel, in apprehension, how like a god: the beauty of the

world, the paragon of animals. And yet, to me, what is this

quintessence of dust? Man delights not me; no, nor woman neither,

though by your smiling you seem to say so.


My lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.


Why did you laugh then, when  said ‘Man delights not me’?


To think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what Lenten entertainment

the players shall receive from you. We coted them on the way, and

hither are they coming to offer you service.


He that plays the king shall be welcome,—his Majesty shall have tribute

of me; the adventurous knight shall use his foil and target; the love
shall not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his part in peace;

the clown shall make those laugh whose lungs are tickle a’ th’ sere;

and the lady shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall halt

for’t. What players are they?


Even those you were wont to take such delight in—the tragedians of the

city.


How chances it they travel? Their residence, both in reputation and

profit, was better both ways.


think their inhibition comes by the means of the late innovation.


Do they hold the same estimation they did when  was in the city? Are

they so followed?


No, indeed, they are not.


How comes it? Do they grow rusty?


Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace; but there is, sir, an

aerie of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top of question,

and are most tyrannically clapped for’t. These are now the fashion, and

so berattle the common stages—so they call them—that many wearing

rapiers are afraid of goose-quills and dare scarce come thither.


What, are they children? Who maintains ’em? How are they escoted? Will

they pursue the quality no longer than they can sing? Will they not say

afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common players—as it is

most like, if their means are no better—their writers do them wrong to

make them exclaim against their own succession?


Faith, there has been much to do on both sides; and the nation holds it

no sin to tarre them to controversy. There was for a while, no money

bid for argument unless the poet and the player went to cuffs in the

question.


Is’t possible?


, there has been much throwing about of brains.


Do the boys carry it away?


Ay, that they do, my lord. Hercules and his load too.


It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of Denmark, and those that

would make mouths at him while my father lived, give twenty, forty,

fifty, a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little. ’Sblood,

there is something in this more than natural, if philosophy could find

it out.



There are the players.


Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore. Your hands, come. The

appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply with you

in this garb, lest my extent to the players, which  tell you must show

fairly outward, should more appear like entertainment than yours. You

are welcome. But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are deceived.


In what, my dear lord?


am but mad north-north-west. When the wind is southerly,  know a

hawk from a handsaw.



Well be with you, gentlemen.


Hark you, Guildenstern, and you too, at each ear a hearer. That great

baby you see there is not yet out of his swaddling clouts.


Happily he’s the second time come to them; for they say an old man is

twice a child.


will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players. Mark it.—You say

right, sir: for a Monday morning ’twas so indeed.


My lord,  have news to tell you.


My lord,  have news to tell you. When Roscius was an actor in Rome—


The actors are come hither, my lord.


Buzz, buzz.


Upon my honour.


Then came each actor on his ass—


The best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy, history,

pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral, tragical-historical,

tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or poem

unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor Plautus too light, for the

law of writ and the liberty. These are the only men.


Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure hadst thou!


What treasure had he, my lord?


Why—

’One fair daughter, and no more,

The which he loved passing well.’


Still on my daughter.


Am  not i’ th’ right, old Jephthah?


If you call me Jephthah, my lord,  have a daughter that  love passing

well.


Nay, that follows not.


What follows then, my lord?


Why,

As by lot, God wot,

and then, you know,

It came to pass, as most like it was.

The first row of the pious chanson will show you more. For look where

my abridgement comes.


You are welcome, masters, welcome all.  am glad to see thee well.

Welcome, good friends. , my old friend! Thy face is valanc’d since 

saw thee last. Com’st thou to beard me in Denmark? What, my young lady

and mistress! By’r lady, your ladyship is nearer to heaven than when 

saw you last, by the altitude of a chopine. Pray God your voice, like a

piece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the ring. Masters, you

are all welcome. We’ll e’en to’t like French falconers, fly at anything

we see. We’ll have a speech straight. Come, give us a taste of you
quality. Come, a passionate speech.


What speech, my lord?


heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never acted, or if it

was, not above once, for the play,  remember, pleased not the million,

’twas caviare to the general. But it was—as  received it, and others,

whose judgments in such matters cried in the top of mine—an excellent

play, well digested in the scenes, set down with as much modesty as

cunning.  remember one said there were no sallets in the lines to make

the matter savoury, nor no matter in the phrase that might indite the

author of affectation, but called it an honest method, as wholesome as

sweet, and by very much more handsome than fine. One speech in it, 

chiefly loved. ’Twas Aeneas’ tale to Dido, and thereabout of it

especially where he speaks of Priam’s slaughter. If it live in you
memory, begin at this line, let me see, let me see:

_The rugged Pyrrhus, like th’ Hyrcanian beast,—_

It is not so: it begins with Pyrrhus—

_The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,

Black as his purpose, did the night resemble

When he lay couched in the ominous horse,

Hath now this dread and black complexion smear’d

With heraldry more dismal. Head to foot

Now is he total gules, horridly trick’d

With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,

Bak’d and impasted with the parching streets,

That lend a tyrannous and a damned light

To their vile murders. Roasted in wrath and fire,

And thus o’ersized with coagulate gore,

With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus

Old grandsire Priam seeks._

So, proceed you.


’Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good discretion.


_Anon he finds him,

Striking too short at Greeks. His antique sword,

Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,

Repugnant to command. Unequal match’d,

Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide;

But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword

Th’unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium,

Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top

Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash

Takes prisoner Pyrrhus’ ear. For lo, his sword,

Which was declining on the milky head

Of reverend Priam, seem’d i’ th’air to stick.

So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood,

And like a neutral to his will and matter,

Did nothing.

But as we often see against some storm,

silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,

The bold winds speechless, and the orb below

As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunde
Doth rend the region; so after Pyrrhus’ pause,

Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work,

And never did the Cyclops’ hammers fall

On Mars’s armour, forg’d for proof eterne,

With less remorse than Pyrrhus’ bleeding sword

Now falls on Priam.

Out, out, thou strumpet Fortune! All you gods,

In general synod, take away her power;

Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,

And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven,

As low as to the fiends._


This is too long.


It shall to the barber’s, with your beard.—Prythee say on.

He’s for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps.

Say on; come to Hecuba.


_But who,  who, had seen the mobled queen,—_


‘The mobled queen’?


That’s good! ‘Mobled queen’ is good.


_Run barefoot up and down, threat’ning the flames

With bisson rheum.  clout upon that head

Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,

About her lank and all o’erteemed loins,

blanket, in th’alarm of fear caught up—

Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep’d,

’Gainst Fortune’s state would treason have pronounc’d.

But if the gods themselves did see her then,

When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport

In mincing with his sword her husband’s limbs,

The instant burst of clamour that she made,—

Unless things mortal move them not at all,—

Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven,

And passion in the gods._


Look, where he has not turn’d his colour, and has tears in’s eyes. Pray

you, no more.


’Tis well. ’ll have thee speak out the rest of this soon.—Good my

lord, will you see the players well bestowed? Do you hear, let them be

well used; for they are the abstracts and brief chronicles of the time.

After your death you were better have a bad epitaph than their ill

report while you live.


My lord,  will use them according to their desert.


God’s bodikin, man, better. Use every man after his desert, and who

should scape whipping? Use them after your own honour and dignity. The

less they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty. Take them in.


Come, sirs.


Follow him, friends. We’ll hear a play tomorrow.


Dost thou hear me, old friend? Can you play _The Murder of Gonzago_?


Ay, my lord.


We’ll ha’t tomorrow night. You could for a need study a speech of some

dozen or sixteen lines, which  would set down and insert in’t, could

you not?


Ay, my lord.


Very well. Follow that lord, and look you mock him not.


My good friends, ’ll leave you

till night. You are welcome to Elsinore.


Good my lord.



Ay, so, God b’ wi’ ye. Now  am alone.

what a rogue and peasant slave am !

Is it not monstrous that this player here,

But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,

Could force his soul so to his own conceit

That from her working all his visage wan’d;

Tears in his eyes, distraction in’s aspect,

broken voice, and his whole function suiting

With forms to his conceit? And all for nothing!

For Hecuba?

What’s Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,

That he should weep for her? What would he do,

Had he the motive and the cue for passion

That  have? He would drown the stage with tears

And cleave the general ear with horrid speech;

Make mad the guilty, and appal the free,

Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed,

The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet ,

dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak

Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,

And can say nothing. No, not for a king

Upon whose property and most dear life

damn’d defeat was made. Am  a coward?

Who calls me villain, breaks my pate across?

Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face?

Tweaks me by the nose, gives me the lie i’ th’ throat

As deep as to the lungs? Who does me this?

Ha! ’Swounds,  should take it: for it cannot be

But  am pigeon-liver’d, and lack gall

To make oppression bitter, or ere this

should have fatted all the region kites

With this slave’s offal. Bloody, bawdy villain!

Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain!

Oh vengeance!

Why, what an ass am ! This is most brave,

That , the son of a dear father murder’d,

Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,

Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words

And fall a-cursing like a very drab,

scullion! Fie upon’t! Foh!

About, my brain!  have heard

That guilty creatures sitting at a play,

Have by the very cunning of the scene,

Been struck so to the soul that presently

They have proclaim’d their malefactions.

For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak

With most miraculous organ. ’ll have these players

Play something like the murder of my fathe
Before mine uncle. ’ll observe his looks;

’ll tent him to the quick. If he but blench,

know my course. The spirit that  have seen

May be the devil, and the devil hath powe
’assume a pleasing shape, yea, and perhaps

Out of my weakness and my melancholy,

As he is very potent with such spirits,

Abuses me to damn me. ’ll have grounds

More relative than this. The play’s the thing

Wherein ’ll catch the conscience of the King.



.  room in the Castle.



And can you by no drift of circumstance

Get from him why he puts on this confusion,

Grating so harshly all his days of quiet

With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?


He does confess he feels himself distracted,

But from what cause he will by no means speak.


Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,

But with a crafty madness keeps aloof

When we would bring him on to some confession

Of his true state.


Did he receive you well?


Most like a gentleman.


But with much forcing of his disposition.


Niggard of question, but of our demands,

Most free in his reply.


Did you assay him to any pastime?


Madam, it so fell out that certain players

We o’er-raught on the way. Of these we told him,

And there did seem in him a kind of joy

To hear of it. They are about the court,

And, as  think, they have already orde
This night to play before him.


’Tis most true;

And he beseech’d me to entreat your Majesties

To hear and see the matter.


With all my heart; and it doth much content me

To hear him so inclin’d.

Good gentlemen, give him a further edge,

And drive his purpose on to these delights.


We shall, my lord.



Sweet Gertrude, leave us too,

For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,

That he, as ’twere by accident, may here

Affront Ophelia.

Her father and myself, lawful espials,

Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen,

We may of their encounter frankly judge,

And gather by him, as he is behav’d,

If’t be th’affliction of his love or no

That thus he suffers for.


shall obey you.

And for your part, Ophelia,  do wish

That your good beauties be the happy cause

Of Hamlet’s wildness: so shall  hope your virtues

Will bring him to his wonted way again,

To both your honours.


Madam,  wish it may.



Ophelia, walk you here.—Gracious, so please you,

We will bestow ourselves.— Read on this book,

That show of such an exercise may colou
Your loneliness.—We are oft to blame in this,

’Tis too much prov’d, that with devotion’s visage

And pious action we do sugar o’e
The devil himself.


’tis too true!

How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience!

The harlot’s cheek, beautied with plastering art,

Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it

Than is my deed to my most painted word.

heavy burden!


hear him coming. Let’s withdraw, my lord.




To be, or not to be, that is the question:

Whether ’tis nobler in the mind to suffe
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,

Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,

And by opposing end them? To die—to sleep,

No more; and by a sleep to say we end

The heart-ache, and the thousand natural shocks

That flesh is heir to: ’tis a consummation

Devoutly to be wish’d. To die, to sleep.

To sleep, perchance to dream—ay, there’s the rub,

For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,

When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,

Must give us pause. There’s the respect

That makes calamity of so long life.

For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,

The oppressor’s wrong, the proud man’s contumely,

The pangs of dispriz’d love, the law’s delay,

The insolence of office, and the spurns

That patient merit of the unworthy takes,

When he himself might his quietus make

With a bare bodkin? Who would these fardels bear,

To grunt and sweat under a weary life,

But that the dread of something after death,

The undiscover’d country, from whose bourn

No traveller returns, puzzles the will,

And makes us rather bear those ills we have

Than fly to others that we know not of?

Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,

And thus the native hue of resolution

Is sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought,

And enterprises of great pith and moment,

With this regard their currents turn awry

And lose the name of action. Soft you now,

The fair Ophelia! Nymph, in thy orisons

Be all my sins remember’d.


Good my lord,

How does your honour for this many a day?


humbly thank you; well, well, well.


My lord,  have remembrances of yours

That  have longed long to re-deliver.

pray you, now receive them.


No, not .

never gave you aught.


My honour’d lord, you know right well you did,

And with them words of so sweet breath compos’d

As made the things more rich; their perfume lost,

Take these again; for to the noble mind

Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.

There, my lord.


Ha, ha! Are you honest?


My lord?


Are you fair?


What means your lordship?


That if you be honest and fair, your honesty should admit no discourse

to your beauty.


Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than with honesty?


Ay, truly; for the power of beauty will sooner transform honesty from

what it is to a bawd than the force of honesty can translate beauty

into his likeness. This was sometime a paradox, but now the time gives

it proof.  did love you once.


Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.


You should not have believed me; for virtue cannot so inoculate our old

stock but we shall relish of it.  loved you not.


was the more deceived.


Get thee to a nunnery. Why wouldst thou be a breeder of sinners?  am

myself indifferent honest; but yet  could accuse me of such things

that it were better my mother had not borne me.  am very proud,

revengeful, ambitious, with more offences at my beck than  have

thoughts to put them in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act

them in. What should such fellows as  do crawling between earth and

heaven? We are arrant knaves all, believe none of us. Go thy ways to a

nunnery. Where’s your father?


At home, my lord.


Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the fool nowhere but

in’s own house. Farewell.


help him, you sweet heavens!


If thou dost marry, ’ll give thee this plague for thy dowry. Be thou

as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. Get

thee to a nunnery, go: farewell. Or if thou wilt needs marry, marry a

fool; for wise men know well enough what monsters you make of them. To

a nunnery, go; and quickly too. Farewell.


heavenly powers, restore him!


have heard of your paintings too, well enough. God hath given you one

face, and you make yourselves another. You jig, you amble, and you

lisp, and nickname God’s creatures, and make your wantonness you
ignorance. Go to, ’ll no more on’t, it hath made me mad.  say, we

will have no more marriages. Those that are married already, all but

one, shall live; the rest shall keep as they are. To a nunnery, go.



, what a noble mind is here o’erthrown!

The courtier’s, soldier’s, scholar’s, eye, tongue, sword,

Th’expectancy and rose of the fair state,

The glass of fashion and the mould of form,

Th’observ’d of all observers, quite, quite down!

And , of ladies most deject and wretched,

That suck’d the honey of his music vows,

Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,

Like sweet bells jangled out of tune and harsh,

That unmatch’d form and feature of blown youth

Blasted with ecstasy.  woe is me,

’have seen what  have seen, see what  see.



Love? His affections do not that way tend,

Nor what he spake, though it lack’d form a little,

Was not like madness. There’s something in his soul

’er which his melancholy sits on brood,

And  do doubt the hatch and the disclose

Will be some danger, which for to prevent,

have in quick determination

Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England

For the demand of our neglected tribute:

Haply the seas and countries different,

With variable objects, shall expel

This something settled matter in his heart,

Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus

From fashion of himself. What think you on’t?


It shall do well. But yet do  believe

The origin and commencement of his grief

Sprung from neglected love. How now, Ophelia?

You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said,

We heard it all. My lord, do as you please,

But if you hold it fit, after the play,

Let his queen mother all alone entreat him

To show his grief, let her be round with him,

And ’ll be plac’d, so please you, in the ea
Of all their conference. If she find him not,

To England send him; or confine him where

Your wisdom best shall think.


It shall be so.

Madness in great ones must not unwatch’d go.


hall in the Castle.



Speak the speech,  pray you, as  pronounced it to you, trippingly on

the tongue. But if you mouth it, as many of your players do,  had as

lief the town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air too much

with your hand, thus, but use all gently; for in the very torrent,

tempest, and, as  may say, whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and

beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. , it offends me to the

soul to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to

tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who, fo
the most part, are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumb shows and

noise.  would have such a fellow whipped for o’erdoing Termagant. It

out-Herods Herod. Pray you avoid it.


warrant your honour.


Be not too tame neither; but let your own discretion be your tutor.

Suit the action to the word, the word to the action, with this special

observance, that you o’erstep not the modesty of nature; for anything

so overdone is from the purpose of playing, whose end, both at the

first and now, was and is, to hold as ’twere the mirror up to nature;

to show virtue her own feature, scorn her own image, and the very age

and body of the time his form and pressure. Now, this overdone, or come

tardy off, though it make the unskilful laugh, cannot but make the

judicious grieve; the censure of the which one must in your allowance

o’erweigh a whole theatre of others. , there be players that  have

seen play—and heard others praise, and that highly—not to speak it

profanely, that, neither having the accent of Christians, nor the gait

of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and bellowed that  have

thought some of Nature’s journeymen had made men, and not made them

well, they imitated humanity so abominably.


hope we have reform’d that indifferently with us, sir.


reform it altogether. And let those that play your clowns speak no

more than is set down for them. For there be of them that will

themselves laugh, to set on some quantity of barren spectators to laugh

too, though in the meantime some necessary question of the play be then

to be considered. That’s villainous, and shows a most pitiful ambition

in the fool that uses it. Go make you ready.



How now, my lord?

Will the King hear this piece of work?


And the Queen too, and that presently.


Bid the players make haste.


Will you two help to hasten them?

and 

We will, my lord.



What ho, Horatio!



Here, sweet lord, at your service.


Horatio, thou art e’en as just a man

As e’er my conversation cop’d withal.


my dear lord.


Nay, do not think  flatter;

For what advancement may  hope from thee,

That no revenue hast, but thy good spirits

To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be flatter’d?

No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp,

And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee

Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?

Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice,

And could of men distinguish, her election

Hath seal’d thee for herself. For thou hast been

As one, in suffering all, that suffers nothing,

man that Fortune’s buffets and rewards

Hast ta’en with equal thanks. And bles’d are those

Whose blood and judgment are so well co-mingled

That they are not a pipe for Fortune’s finge
To sound what stop she please. Give me that man

That is not passion’s slave, and  will wear him

In my heart’s core, ay, in my heart of heart,

As  do thee. Something too much of this.

There is a play tonight before the King.

One scene of it comes near the circumstance

Which  have told thee, of my father’s death.

prythee, when thou see’st that act a-foot,

Even with the very comment of thy soul

Observe mine uncle. If his occulted guilt

Do not itself unkennel in one speech,

It is a damned ghost that we have seen;

And my imaginations are as foul

As Vulcan’s stithy. Give him heedful note;

For  mine eyes will rivet to his face;

And after we will both our judgments join

In censure of his seeming.


Well, my lord.

If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing,

And scape detecting,  will pay the theft.


They are coming to the play.  must be idle.

Get you a place.


Rosencrantz, Guildenstern and others.


How fares our cousin Hamlet?


Excellent, i’ faith; of the chameleon’s dish:  eat the air,

promise-crammed: you cannot feed capons so.


have nothing with this answer, Hamlet; these words are not mine.


No, nor mine now.  My lord, you play’d once i’

th’university, you say?


That did , my lord, and was accounted a good actor.


What did you enact?


did enact Julius Caesar.  was kill’d i’ th’ Capitol. Brutus killed

me.


It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf there. Be the

players ready?


Ay, my lord; they stay upon your patience.


Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.


No, good mother, here’s metal more attractive.


ho! do you mark that?


Lady, shall  lie in your lap?



No, my lord.


mean, my head upon your lap?


Ay, my lord.


Do you think  meant country matters?


think nothing, my lord.


That’s a fair thought to lie between maids’ legs.


What is, my lord?


Nothing.


You are merry, my lord.


Who, ?


Ay, my lord.


God, your only jig-maker! What should a man do but be merry? For look

you how cheerfully my mother looks, and my father died within’s two

hours.


Nay, ’tis twice two months, my lord.


So long? Nay then, let the devil wear black, for ’ll have a suit of

sables.  heavens! die two months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then

there’s hope a great man’s memory may outlive his life half a year. But

by’r lady, he must build churches then; or else shall he suffer not

thinking on, with the hobby-horse, whose epitaph is ‘For, , for , the

hobby-horse is forgot!’

Trumpets sound. The dumb show enters.

_Enter a King and a Queen very lovingly; the Queen embracing him and he

her. She kneels, and makes show of protestation unto him. He takes he
up, and declines his head upon her neck. Lays him down upon a bank of

flowers. She, seeing him asleep, leaves him. Anon comes in a fellow,

takes off his crown, kisses it, pours poison in the King’s ears, and

exits. The Queen returns, finds the King dead, and makes passionate

action. The Poisoner with some three or four Mutes, comes in again,

seeming to lament with her. The dead body is carried away. The Poisone
woos the Queen with gifts. She seems loth and unwilling awhile, but in

the end accepts his love._



What means this, my lord?


Marry, this is miching mallicho; it means mischief.


Belike this show imports the argument of the play.



We shall know by this fellow: the players cannot keep counsel; they’ll

tell all.


Will they tell us what this show meant?


Ay, or any show that you’ll show him. Be not you ashamed to show, he’ll

not shame to tell you what it means.


You are naught, you are naught: ’ll mark the play.


_For us, and for our tragedy,

Here stooping to your clemency,

We beg your hearing patiently._


Is this a prologue, or the posy of a ring?


’Tis brief, my lord.


As woman’s love.



Full thirty times hath Phoebus’ cart gone round

Neptune’s salt wash and Tellus’ orbed ground,

And thirty dozen moons with borrow’d sheen

About the world have times twelve thirties been,

Since love our hearts, and Hymen did our hands

Unite commutual in most sacred bands.


So many journeys may the sun and moon

Make us again count o’er ere love be done.

But, woe is me, you are so sick of late,

So far from cheer and from your former state,

That  distrust you. Yet, though  distrust,

Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must:

For women’s fear and love holds quantity,

In neither aught, or in extremity.

Now what my love is, proof hath made you know,

And as my love is siz’d, my fear is so.

Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;

Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.


Faith,  must leave thee, love, and shortly too:

My operant powers their functions leave to do:

And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,

Honour’d, belov’d, and haply one as kind

For husband shalt thou—


confound the rest.

Such love must needs be treason in my breast.

In second husband let me be accurst!

None wed the second but who kill’d the first.


Wormwood, wormwood.


The instances that second marriage move

Are base respects of thrift, but none of love.

second time  kill my husband dead,

When second husband kisses me in bed.


do believe you think what now you speak;

But what we do determine, oft we break.

Purpose is but the slave to memory,

Of violent birth, but poor validity:

Which now, like fruit unripe, sticks on the tree,

But fall unshaken when they mellow be.

Most necessary ’tis that we forget

To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt.

What to ourselves in passion we propose,

The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.

The violence of either grief or joy

Their own enactures with themselves destroy.

Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;

Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.

This world is not for aye; nor ’tis not strange

That even our loves should with our fortunes change,

For ’tis a question left us yet to prove,

Whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love.

The great man down, you mark his favourite flies,

The poor advanc’d makes friends of enemies;

And hitherto doth love on fortune tend:

For who not needs shall never lack a friend,

And who in want a hollow friend doth try,

Directly seasons him his enemy.

But orderly to end where  begun,

Our wills and fates do so contrary run

That our devices still are overthrown.

Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own.

So think thou wilt no second husband wed,

But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.


Nor earth to me give food, nor heaven light,

Sport and repose lock from me day and night,

To desperation turn my trust and hope,

An anchor’s cheer in prison be my scope,

Each opposite that blanks the face of joy,

Meet what  would have well, and it destroy!

Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,

If, once a widow, ever  be wife.


If she should break it now.


’Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile.

My spirits grow dull, and fain  would beguile

The tedious day with sleep.



Sleep rock thy brain,

And never come mischance between us twain.



Madam, how like you this play?


The lady protests too much, methinks.


, but she’ll keep her word.


Have you heard the argument? Is there no offence in’t?


No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest; no offence i’ th’ world.


What do you call the play?


_The Mousetrap._ Marry, how? Tropically. This play is the image of a

murder done in Vienna. Gonzago is the Duke’s name, his wife Baptista:

you shall see anon; ’tis a knavish piece of work: but what o’ that?

Your majesty, and we that have free souls, it touches us not. Let the

gall’d jade wince; our withers are unwrung.


This is one Lucianus, nephew to the King.


You are a good chorus, my lord.


could interpret between you and your love, if  could see the puppets

dallying.


You are keen, my lord, you are keen.


It would cost you a groaning to take off my edge.


Still better, and worse.


So you mistake your husbands.—Begin, murderer. Pox, leave thy damnable

faces, and begin. Come, the croaking raven doth bellow for revenge.


Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing,

Confederate season, else no creature seeing;

Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,

With Hecate’s ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,

Thy natural magic and dire property

On wholesome life usurp immediately.



He poisons him i’ th’garden for’s estate. His name’s Gonzago. The story

is extant, and written in very choice Italian. You shall see anon how

the murderer gets the love of Gonzago’s wife.


The King rises.


What, frighted with false fire?


How fares my lord?


Give o’er the play.


Give me some light. Away.

All.

Lights, lights, lights.



Why, let the strucken deer go weep,

The hart ungalled play;

For some must watch, while some must sleep,

So runs the world away.

Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers, if the rest of my

fortunes turn Turk with me; with two Provincial roses on my razed

shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players, sir?


Half a share.


whole one, .

For thou dost know,  Damon dear,

This realm dismantled was

Of Jove himself, and now reigns here

very, very—pajock.


You might have rhymed.


good Horatio, ’ll take the ghost’s word for a thousand pound. Didst

perceive?


Very well, my lord.


Upon the talk of the poisoning?


did very well note him.


Ah, ha! Come, some music. Come, the recorders.

For if the king like not the comedy,

Why then, belike he likes it not, perdie.

Come, some music.



Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you.


Sir, a whole history.


The King, sir—


Ay, sir, what of him?


Is in his retirement, marvellous distempered.


With drink, sir?


No, my lord; rather with choler.


Your wisdom should show itself more richer to signify this to the

doctor, for me to put him to his purgation would perhaps plunge him

into far more choler.


Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame, and start not so

wildly from my affair.


am tame, sir, pronounce.


The Queen your mother, in most great affliction of spirit, hath sent me

to you.


You are welcome.


Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right breed. If it shall

please you to make me a wholesome answer,  will do your mother’s

commandment; if not, your pardon and my return shall be the end of my

business.


Sir,  cannot.


What, my lord?


Make you a wholesome answer. My wit’s diseased. But, sir, such answe
as  can make, you shall command; or rather, as you say, my mother.

Therefore no more, but to the matter. My mother, you say,—


Then thus she says: your behaviour hath struck her into amazement and

admiration.


wonderful son, that can so stonish a mother! But is there no sequel

at the heels of this mother’s admiration?


She desires to speak with you in her closet ere you go to bed.


We shall obey, were she ten times our mother. Have you any furthe
trade with us?


My lord, you once did love me.


And so  do still, by these pickers and stealers.


Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? You do surely bar the

door upon your own liberty if you deny your griefs to your friend.


Sir,  lack advancement.


How can that be, when you have the voice of the King himself for you
succession in Denmark?


Ay, sir, but while the grass grows—the proverb is something musty.

Re-enter the Players with recorders.

, the recorders. Let me see one.—To withdraw with you, why do you go

about to recover the wind of me, as if you would drive me into a toil?


my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too unmannerly.


do not well understand that. Will you play upon this pipe?


My lord,  cannot.


pray you.


Believe me,  cannot.


do beseech you.


know no touch of it, my lord.


’Tis as easy as lying: govern these ventages with your finger and

thumb, give it breath with your mouth, and it will discourse most

eloquent music. Look you, these are the stops.


But these cannot  command to any utterance of harmony.  have not the

skill.


Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me! You would play

upon me; you would seem to know my stops; you would pluck out the heart

of my mystery; you would sound me from my lowest note to the top of my

compass; and there is much music, excellent voice, in this little

organ, yet cannot you make it speak. ’Sblood, do you think  am easie
to be played on than a pipe? Call me what instrument you will, though

you can fret me, you cannot play upon me.


God bless you, sir.


My lord, the Queen would speak with you, and presently.


Do you see yonder cloud that’s almost in shape of a camel?


By the mass, and ’tis like a camel indeed.


Methinks it is like a weasel.


It is backed like a weasel.


Or like a whale.


Very like a whale.


Then will  come to my mother by and by.—They fool me to the top of my

bent.— will come by and by.


will say so.



By and by is easily said. Leave me, friends.


’Tis now the very witching time of night,

When churchyards yawn, and hell itself breathes out

Contagion to this world. Now could  drink hot blood,

And do such bitter business as the day

Would quake to look on. Soft now, to my mother.

heart, lose not thy nature; let not eve
The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom:

Let me be cruel, not unnatural.

will speak daggers to her, but use none;

My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites.

How in my words somever she be shent,

To give them seals never, my soul, consent.


room in the Castle.



like him not, nor stands it safe with us

To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you,

your commission will forthwith dispatch,

And he to England shall along with you.

The terms of our estate may not endure

Hazard so near us as doth hourly grow

Out of his lunacies.


We will ourselves provide.

Most holy and religious fear it is

To keep those many many bodies safe

That live and feed upon your Majesty.


The single and peculiar life is bound

With all the strength and armour of the mind,

To keep itself from ’noyance; but much more

That spirit upon whose weal depend and rest

The lives of many. The cease of majesty

Dies not alone; but like a gulf doth draw

What’s near it with it. It is a massy wheel

Fix’d on the summit of the highest mount,

To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things

Are mortis’d and adjoin’d; which when it falls,

Each small annexment, petty consequence,

Attends the boist’rous ruin. Never alone

Did the King sigh, but with a general groan.


Arm you,  pray you, to this speedy voyage;

For we will fetters put upon this fear,

Which now goes too free-footed.

and 

We will haste us.




My lord, he’s going to his mother’s closet.

Behind the arras ’ll convey myself

To hear the process. ’ll warrant she’ll tax him home,

And as you said, and wisely was it said,

’Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,

Since nature makes them partial, should o’erhea
The speech of vantage. Fare you well, my liege,

’ll call upon you ere you go to bed,

And tell you what  know.


Thanks, dear my lord.


, my offence is rank, it smells to heaven;

It hath the primal eldest curse upon’t,—

brother’s murder! Pray can  not,

Though inclination be as sharp as will:

My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,

And, like a man to double business bound,

stand in pause where  shall first begin,

And both neglect. What if this cursed hand

Were thicker than itself with brother’s blood,

Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens

To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy

But to confront the visage of offence?

And what’s in prayer but this twofold force,

To be forestalled ere we come to fall,

Or pardon’d being down? Then ’ll look up.

My fault is past. But , what form of praye
Can serve my turn? Forgive me my foul murder!

That cannot be; since  am still possess’d

Of those effects for which  did the murder,—

My crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.

May one be pardon’d and retain th’offence?

In the corrupted currents of this world

Offence’s gilded hand may shove by justice,

And oft ’tis seen the wicked prize itself

Buys out the law. But ’tis not so above;

There is no shuffling, there the action lies

In his true nature, and we ourselves compell’d

Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,

To give in evidence. What then? What rests?

Try what repentance can. What can it not?

Yet what can it, when one cannot repent?

wretched state!  bosom black as death!

limed soul, that struggling to be free,

Art more engag’d! Help, angels! Make assay:

Bow, stubborn knees; and heart with strings of steel,

Be soft as sinews of the new-born babe.

All may be well.




Now might  do it pat, now he is praying.

And now ’ll do’t. And so he goes to heaven;

And so am  reveng’d. That would be scann’d:

villain kills my father, and for that

, his sole son, do this same villain send

To heaven. , this is hire and salary, not revenge.

He took my father grossly, full of bread,

With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;

And how his audit stands, who knows save heaven?

But in our circumstance and course of thought,

’Tis heavy with him. And am  then reveng’d,

To take him in the purging of his soul,

When he is fit and season’d for his passage? No.

Up, sword, and know thou a more horrid hent:

When he is drunk asleep; or in his rage,

Or in th’incestuous pleasure of his bed,

At gaming, swearing; or about some act

That has no relish of salvation in’t,

Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,

And that his soul may be as damn’d and black

As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.

This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.


The King rises and advances.


My words fly up, my thoughts remain below.

Words without thoughts never to heaven go.


Another room in the Castle.



He will come straight. Look you lay home to him,

Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with,

And that your Grace hath screen’d and stood between

Much heat and him. ’ll silence me e’en here.

Pray you be round with him.


Mother, mother, mother.


’ll warrant you, Fear me not.

Withdraw,  hear him coming.




Now, mother, what’s the matter?


Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.


Mother, you have my father much offended.


Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.


Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.


Why, how now, Hamlet?


What’s the matter now?


Have you forgot me?


No, by the rood, not so.

You are the Queen, your husband’s brother’s wife,

And, would it were not so. You are my mother.


Nay, then ’ll set those to you that can speak.


Come, come, and sit you down, you shall not budge.

You go not till  set you up a glass

Where you may see the inmost part of you.


What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murder me?

Help, help, ho!


What, ho! help, help, help!


How now?  rat? 

Dead for a ducat, dead!



,  am slain!



me, what hast thou done?


Nay,  know not. Is it the King?



what a rash and bloody deed is this!


bloody deed. Almost as bad, good mother,

As kill a king and marry with his brother.


As kill a king?


Ay, lady, ’twas my word.—

Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell!

took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune,

Thou find’st to be too busy is some danger.—

Leave wringing of your hands. Peace, sit you down,

And let me wring your heart, for so  shall,

If it be made of penetrable stuff;

If damned custom have not braz’d it so,

That it is proof and bulwark against sense.


What have  done, that thou dar’st wag thy tongue

In noise so rude against me?


Such an act

That blurs the grace and blush of modesty,

Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose

From the fair forehead of an innocent love,

And sets a blister there. Makes marriage vows

As false as dicers’ oaths.  such a deed

As from the body of contraction plucks

The very soul, and sweet religion makes

rhapsody of words. Heaven’s face doth glow,

Yea this solidity and compound mass,

With tristful visage, as against the doom,

Is thought-sick at the act.


Ay me, what act,

That roars so loud, and thunders in the index?


Look here upon this picture, and on this,

The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.

See what a grace was seated on this brow,

Hyperion’s curls, the front of Jove himself,

An eye like Mars, to threaten and command,

station like the herald Mercury

New lighted on a heaven-kissing hill:

combination and a form indeed,

Where every god did seem to set his seal,

To give the world assurance of a man.

This was your husband. Look you now what follows.

Here is your husband, like a mildew’d ea
Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?

Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed,

And batten on this moor? Ha! have you eyes?

You cannot call it love; for at your age

The hey-day in the blood is tame, it’s humble,

And waits upon the judgment: and what judgment

Would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,

Else could you not have motion; but sure that sense

Is apoplex’d, for madness would not er
Nor sense to ecstacy was ne’er so thrall’d

But it reserv’d some quantity of choice

To serve in such a difference. What devil was’t

That thus hath cozen’d you at hoodman-blind?

Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,

Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,

Or but a sickly part of one true sense

Could not so mope.  shame! where is thy blush?

Rebellious hell,

If thou canst mutine in a matron’s bones,

To flaming youth let virtue be as wax,

And melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame

When the compulsive ardour gives the charge,

Since frost itself as actively doth burn,

And reason panders will.


Hamlet, speak no more.

Thou turn’st mine eyes into my very soul,

And there  see such black and grained spots

As will not leave their tinct.


Nay, but to live

In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,

Stew’d in corruption, honeying and making love

Over the nasty sty.


speak to me no more;

These words like daggers enter in mine ears;

No more, sweet Hamlet.


murderer and a villain;

slave that is not twentieth part the tithe

Of your precedent lord.  vice of kings,

cutpurse of the empire and the rule,

That from a shelf the precious diadem stole

And put it in his pocket!


No more.


king of shreds and patches!—


Save me and hover o’er me with your wings,

You heavenly guards! What would your gracious figure?


Alas, he’s mad.


Do you not come your tardy son to chide,

That, laps’d in time and passion, lets go by

The important acting of your dread command?

say!


Do not forget. This visitation

Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.

But look, amazement on thy mother sits.

step between her and her fighting soul.

Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.

Speak to her, Hamlet.


How is it with you, lady?


Alas, how is’t with you,

That you do bend your eye on vacancy,

And with the incorporal air do hold discourse?

Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep,

And, as the sleeping soldiers in the alarm,

Your bedded hairs, like life in excrements,

Start up and stand an end.  gentle son,

Upon the heat and flame of thy distempe
Sprinkle cool patience. Whereon do you look?


On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares,

His form and cause conjoin’d, preaching to stones,

Would make them capable.—Do not look upon me,

Lest with this piteous action you convert

My stern effects. Then what  have to do

Will want true colour; tears perchance for blood.


To whom do you speak this?


Do you see nothing there?


Nothing at all; yet all that is  see.


Nor did you nothing hear?


No, nothing but ourselves.


Why, look you there! look how it steals away!

My father, in his habit as he liv’d!

Look where he goes even now out at the portal.



This is the very coinage of your brain.

This bodiless creation ecstasy

Is very cunning in.


Ecstasy!

My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time,

And makes as healthful music. It is not madness

That  have utter’d. Bring me to the test,

And  the matter will re-word; which madness

Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,

Lay not that flattering unction to your soul

That not your trespass, but my madness speaks.

It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,

Whilst rank corruption, mining all within,

Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven,

Repent what’s past, avoid what is to come;

And do not spread the compost on the weeds,

To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue;

For in the fatness of these pursy times

Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg,

Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.


Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.


throw away the worser part of it,

And live the purer with the other half.

Good night. But go not to mine uncle’s bed.

Assume a virtue, if you have it not.

That monster custom, who all sense doth eat,

Of habits evil, is angel yet in this,

That to the use of actions fair and good

He likewise gives a frock or livery

That aptly is put on. Refrain tonight,

And that shall lend a kind of easiness

To the next abstinence. The next more easy;

For use almost can change the stamp of nature,

And either curb the devil, or throw him out

With wondrous potency. Once more, good night,

And when you are desirous to be bles’d,

’ll blessing beg of you. For this same lord


do repent; but heaven hath pleas’d it so,

To punish me with this, and this with me,

That  must be their scourge and minister.

will bestow him, and will answer well

The death  gave him. So again, good night.

must be cruel, only to be kind:

Thus bad begins, and worse remains behind.

One word more, good lady.


What shall  do?


Not this, by no means, that  bid you do:

Let the bloat King tempt you again to bed,

Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,

And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses,

Or paddling in your neck with his damn’d fingers,

Make you to ravel all this matter out,

That  essentially am not in madness,

But mad in craft. ’Twere good you let him know,

For who that’s but a queen, fair, sober, wise,

Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib,

Such dear concernings hide? Who would do so?

No, in despite of sense and secrecy,

Unpeg the basket on the house’s top,

Let the birds fly, and like the famous ape,

To try conclusions, in the basket creep

And break your own neck down.


Be thou assur’d, if words be made of breath,

And breath of life,  have no life to breathe

What thou hast said to me.


must to England, you know that?


Alack,

had forgot. ’Tis so concluded on.


There’s letters seal’d: and my two schoolfellows,

Whom  will trust as  will adders fang’d,—

They bear the mandate, they must sweep my way

And marshal me to knavery. Let it work;

For ’tis the sport to have the engine
Hoist with his own petard, and ’t shall go hard

But  will delve one yard below their mines

And blow them at the moon. , ’tis most sweet,

When in one line two crafts directly meet.

This man shall set me packing.

’ll lug the guts into the neighbour room.

Mother, good night. Indeed, this counsello
Is now most still, most secret, and most grave,

Who was in life a foolish prating knave.

Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.

Good night, mother.



.  room in the Castle.



There’s matter in these sighs. These profound heaves

You must translate; ’tis fit we understand them.

Where is your son?


Bestow this place on us a little while.


Ah, my good lord, what have  seen tonight!


What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?


Mad as the sea and wind, when both contend

Which is the mightier. In his lawless fit

Behind the arras hearing something stir,

Whips out his rapier, cries ‘ rat, a rat!’

And in this brainish apprehension kills

The unseen good old man.


heavy deed!

It had been so with us, had we been there.

His liberty is full of threats to all;

To you yourself, to us, to everyone.

Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answer’d?

It will be laid to us, whose providence

Should have kept short, restrain’d, and out of haunt

This mad young man. But so much was our love

We would not understand what was most fit,

But like the owner of a foul disease,

To keep it from divulging, let it feed

Even on the pith of life. Where is he gone?


To draw apart the body he hath kill’d,

’er whom his very madness, like some ore

Among a mineral of metals base,

Shows itself pure. He weeps for what is done.


Gertrude, come away!

The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch

But we will ship him hence, and this vile deed

We must with all our majesty and skill

Both countenance and excuse.—Ho, Guildenstern!

Re-enter Rosencrantz and Guildenstern.

Friends both, go join you with some further aid:

Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,

And from his mother’s closet hath he dragg’d him.

Go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body

Into the chapel.  pray you haste in this.


Come, Gertrude, we’ll call up our wisest friends,

And let them know both what we mean to do

And what’s untimely done, so haply slander,

Whose whisper o’er the world’s diameter,

As level as the cannon to his blank,

Transports his poison’d shot, may miss our name,

And hit the woundless air. , come away!

My soul is full of discord and dismay.


Another room in the Castle.



Safely stowed.

and 

Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!


What noise? Who calls on Hamlet? , here they come.



What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?


Compounded it with dust, whereto ’tis kin.


Tell us where ’tis, that we may take it thence,

And bear it to the chapel.


Do not believe it.


Believe what?


That  can keep your counsel, and not mine own. Besides, to be demanded

of a sponge—what replication should be made by the son of a king?


Take you me for a sponge, my lord?


Ay, sir; that soaks up the King’s countenance, his rewards, his

authorities. But such officers do the King best service in the end: he

keeps them, like an ape, in the corner of his jaw; first mouthed, to be

last swallowed: when he needs what you have gleaned, it is but

squeezing you, and, sponge, you shall be dry again.


understand you not, my lord.


am glad of it.  knavish speech sleeps in a foolish ear.


My lord, you must tell us where the body is and go with us to the King.


The body is with the King, but the King is not with the body. The King

is a thing—


thing, my lord!


Of nothing. Bring me to him. Hide fox, and all after.


Another room in the Castle.



have sent to seek him and to find the body.

How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!

Yet must not we put the strong law on him:

He’s lov’d of the distracted multitude,

Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;

And where ’tis so, th’offender’s scourge is weigh’d,

But never the offence. To bear all smooth and even,

This sudden sending him away must seem

Deliberate pause. Diseases desperate grown

By desperate appliance are reliev’d,

Or not at all.


How now? What hath befall’n?


Where the dead body is bestow’d, my lord,

We cannot get from him.


But where is he?


Without, my lord, guarded, to know your pleasure.


Bring him before us.


Ho, Guildenstern! Bring in my lord.



Now, Hamlet, where’s Polonius?


At supper.


At supper? Where?


Not where he eats, but where he is eaten.  certain convocation of

politic worms are e’en at him. Your worm is your only emperor for diet.

We fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves for maggots.

Your fat king and your lean beggar is but variable service,—two dishes,

but to one table. That’s the end.


Alas, alas!


man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a king, and eat of the

fish that hath fed of that worm.


What dost thou mean by this?


Nothing but to show you how a king may go a progress through the guts

of a beggar.


Where is Polonius?


In heaven. Send thither to see. If your messenger find him not there,

seek him i’ th’other place yourself. But indeed, if you find him not

within this month, you shall nose him as you go up the stairs into the

lobby.


Go seek him there.


He will stay till you come.



Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety,—

Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve

For that which thou hast done,—must send thee hence

With fiery quickness. Therefore prepare thyself;

The bark is ready, and the wind at help,

Th’associates tend, and everything is bent

For England.


For England?


Ay, Hamlet.


Good.


So is it, if thou knew’st our purposes.


see a cherub that sees them. But, come; for England! Farewell, dea
mother.


Thy loving father, Hamlet.


My mother. Father and mother is man and wife; man and wife is one

flesh; and so, my mother. Come, for England.



Follow him at foot. Tempt him with speed aboard;

Delay it not; ’ll have him hence tonight.

Away, for everything is seal’d and done

That else leans on th’affair. Pray you make haste.


And England, if my love thou hold’st at aught,—

As my great power thereof may give thee sense,

Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red

After the Danish sword, and thy free awe

Pays homage to us,—thou mayst not coldly set

Our sovereign process, which imports at full,

By letters conjuring to that effect,

The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England;

For like the hectic in my blood he rages,

And thou must cure me. Till  know ’tis done,

Howe’er my haps, my joys were ne’er begun.


plain in Denmark.



Go, Captain, from me greet the Danish king.

Tell him that by his license, Fortinbras

Craves the conveyance of a promis’d march

Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.

If that his Majesty would aught with us,

We shall express our duty in his eye;

And let him know so.


will do’t, my lord.


Go softly on.




Good sir, whose powers are these?


They are of Norway, sir.


How purpos’d, sir,  pray you?


Against some part of Poland.


Who commands them, sir?


The nephew to old Norway, Fortinbras.


Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,

Or for some frontier?


Truly to speak, and with no addition,

We go to gain a little patch of ground

That hath in it no profit but the name.

To pay five ducats, five,  would not farm it;

Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole

ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.


Why, then the Polack never will defend it.


Yes, it is already garrison’d.


Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats

Will not debate the question of this straw!

This is th’imposthume of much wealth and peace,

That inward breaks, and shows no cause without

Why the man dies.  humbly thank you, sir.


God b’ wi’ you, sir.



Will’t please you go, my lord?


’ll be with you straight. Go a little before.


How all occasions do inform against me,

And spur my dull revenge. What is a man

If his chief good and market of his time

Be but to sleep and feed?  beast, no more.

Sure he that made us with such large discourse,

Looking before and after, gave us not

That capability and godlike reason

To fust in us unus’d. Now whether it be

Bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple

Of thinking too precisely on th’event,—

thought which, quarter’d, hath but one part wisdom

And ever three parts coward,— do not know

Why yet  live to say this thing’s to do,

Sith  have cause, and will, and strength, and means

To do’t. Examples gross as earth exhort me,

Witness this army of such mass and charge,

Led by a delicate and tender prince,

Whose spirit, with divine ambition puff’d,

Makes mouths at the invisible event,

Exposing what is mortal and unsure

To all that fortune, death, and danger dare,

Even for an eggshell. Rightly to be great

Is not to stir without great argument,

But greatly to find quarrel in a straw

When honour’s at the stake. How stand  then,

That have a father kill’d, a mother stain’d,

Excitements of my reason and my blood,

And let all sleep, while to my shame  see

The imminent death of twenty thousand men

That, for a fantasy and trick of fame,

Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot

Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,

Which is not tomb enough and continent

To hide the slain? , from this time forth,

My thoughts be bloody or be nothing worth.


. Elsinore.  room in the Castle.



will not speak with her.


She is importunate, indeed distract.

Her mood will needs be pitied.


What would she have?


She speaks much of her father; says she hears

There’s tricks i’ th’ world, and hems, and beats her heart,

Spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt,

That carry but half sense. Her speech is nothing,

Yet the unshaped use of it doth move

The hearers to collection; they aim at it,

And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts,

Which, as her winks, and nods, and gestures yield them,

Indeed would make one think there might be thought,

Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.

’Twere good she were spoken with, for she may strew

Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.


Let her come in.


To my sick soul, as sin’s true nature is,

Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss.

So full of artless jealousy is guilt,

It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.



Where is the beauteous Majesty of Denmark?


How now, Ophelia?



How should  your true love know

From another one?

By his cockle bat and staff

And his sandal shoon.


Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?


Say you? Nay, pray you mark.


He is dead and gone, lady,

He is dead and gone,

At his head a grass green turf,

At his heels a stone.


Nay, but Ophelia—


Pray you mark.


White his shroud as the mountain snow.



Alas, look here, my lord!



Larded all with sweet flowers;

Which bewept to the grave did go

With true-love showers.


How do you, pretty lady?


Well, God dild you! They say the owl was a baker’s daughter. Lord, we

know what we are, but know not what we may be. God be at your table!


Conceit upon her father.


Pray you, let’s have no words of this; but when they ask you what it

means, say you this:


Tomorrow is Saint Valentine’s day,

All in the morning betime,

And  a maid at your window,

To be your Valentine.

Then up he rose and donn’d his clothes,

And dupp’d the chamber door,

Let in the maid, that out a maid

Never departed more.


Pretty Ophelia!


Indeed la, without an oath, ’ll make an end on’t.


By Gis and by Saint Charity,

Alack, and fie for shame!

Young men will do’t if they come to’t;

By Cock, they are to blame.

Quoth she, before you tumbled me,

You promis’d me to wed.

So would  ha’ done, by yonder sun,

An thou hadst not come to my bed.


How long hath she been thus?


hope all will be well. We must be patient. But  cannot choose but

weep, to think they would lay him i’ th’ cold ground. My brother shall

know of it. And so  thank you for your good counsel. Come, my coach!

Good night, ladies; good night, sweet ladies; good night, good night.



Follow her close; give her good watch,  pray you.


, this is the poison of deep grief; it springs

All from her father’s death.  Gertrude, Gertrude,

When sorrows come, they come not single spies,

But in battalions. First, her father slain;

Next, your son gone; and he most violent autho
Of his own just remove; the people muddied,

Thick, and unwholesome in their thoughts and whispers

For good Polonius’ death; and we have done but greenly

In hugger-mugger to inter him. Poor Ophelia

Divided from herself and her fair judgment,

Without the which we are pictures or mere beasts.

Last, and as much containing as all these,

Her brother is in secret come from France,

Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,

And wants not buzzers to infect his ea
With pestilent speeches of his father’s death,

Wherein necessity, of matter beggar’d,

Will nothing stick our person to arraign

In ear and ear.  my dear Gertrude, this,

Like to a murdering piece, in many places

Gives me superfluous death.



Alack, what noise is this?


Where are my Switzers? Let them guard the door.


What is the matter?


Save yourself, my lord.

The ocean, overpeering of his list,

Eats not the flats with more impetuous haste

Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,

’erbears your offices. The rabble call him lord,

And, as the world were now but to begin,

Antiquity forgot, custom not known,

The ratifiers and props of every word,

They cry ‘Choose we! Laertes shall be king!’

Caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds,

‘Laertes shall be king, Laertes king.’


How cheerfully on the false trail they cry.

, this is counter, you false Danish dogs.



The doors are broke.



Where is this king?—Sirs, stand you all without.

Danes.

No, let’s come in.


pray you, give me leave.


We will, we will.



thank you. Keep the door.  thou vile king,

Give me my father.


Calmly, good Laertes.


That drop of blood that’s calm proclaims me bastard;

Cries cuckold to my father, brands the harlot

Even here between the chaste unsmirched brow

Of my true mother.


What is the cause, Laertes,

That thy rebellion looks so giant-like?—

Let him go, Gertrude. Do not fear our person.

There’s such divinity doth hedge a king,

That treason can but peep to what it would,

Acts little of his will.—Tell me, Laertes,

Why thou art thus incens’d.—Let him go, Gertrude:—

Speak, man.


Where is my father?


Dead.


But not by him.


Let him demand his fill.


How came he dead? ’ll not be juggled with.

To hell, allegiance! Vows, to the blackest devil!

Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!

dare damnation. To this point  stand,

That both the worlds,  give to negligence,

Let come what comes; only ’ll be reveng’d

Most throughly for my father.


Who shall stay you?


My will, not all the world.

And for my means, ’ll husband them so well,

They shall go far with little.


Good Laertes,

If you desire to know the certainty

Of your dear father’s death, is’t writ in your revenge

That, sweepstake, you will draw both friend and foe,

Winner and loser?


None but his enemies.


Will you know them then?


To his good friends thus wide ’ll ope my arms;

And, like the kind life-rendering pelican,

Repast them with my blood.


Why, now you speak

Like a good child and a true gentleman.

That  am guiltless of your father’s death,

And am most sensibly in grief for it,

It shall as level to your judgment ’pea
As day does to your eye.


Let her come in.


How now! What noise is that?

Re-enter Ophelia, fantastically dressed with straws and flowers.

heat, dry up my brains. Tears seven times salt,

Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye.

By heaven, thy madness shall be paid by weight,

Till our scale turn the beam.  rose of May!

Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!

heavens, is’t possible a young maid’s wits

Should be as mortal as an old man’s life?

Nature is fine in love, and where ’tis fine,

It sends some precious instance of itself

After the thing it loves.



They bore him barefac’d on the bier,

Hey no nonny, nonny, hey nonny

And on his grave rain’d many a tear.—

Fare you well, my dove!


Hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade revenge,

It could not move thus.


You must sing ‘Down a-down, and you call him a-down-a.’ , how the

wheel becomes it! It is the false steward that stole his master’s

daughter.


This nothing’s more than matter.


There’s rosemary, that’s for remembrance; pray love, remember. And

there is pansies, that’s for thoughts.


document in madness, thoughts and remembrance fitted.


There’s fennel for you, and columbines. There’s rue for you; and here’s

some for me. We may call it herb of grace o’ Sundays.  you must wea
your rue with a difference. There’s a daisy.  would give you some

violets, but they wither’d all when my father died. They say he made a

good end.


For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.


Thought and affliction, passion, hell itself

She turns to favour and to prettiness.



And will he not come again?

And will he not come again?

No, no, he is dead,

Go to thy death-bed,

He never will come again.

His beard was as white as snow,

All flaxen was his poll.

He is gone, he is gone,

And we cast away moan.

God ha’ mercy on his soul.

And of all Christian souls,  pray God. God b’ wi’ ye.



Do you see this,  God?


Laertes,  must commune with your grief,

Or you deny me right. Go but apart,

Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will,

And they shall hear and judge ’twixt you and me.

If by direct or by collateral hand

They find us touch’d, we will our kingdom give,

Our crown, our life, and all that we call ours

To you in satisfaction; but if not,

Be you content to lend your patience to us,

And we shall jointly labour with your soul

To give it due content.


Let this be so;

His means of death, his obscure burial,—

No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o’er his bones,

No noble rite, nor formal ostentation,—

Cry to be heard, as ’twere from heaven to earth,

That  must call’t in question.


So you shall.

And where th’offence is let the great axe fall.

pray you go with me.


Another room in the Castle.



What are they that would speak with me?


Sailors, sir. They say they have letters for you.


Let them come in.


do not know from what part of the world

should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.



God bless you, sir.


Let him bless thee too.


He shall, sir, and’t please him. There’s a letter for you, sir. It

comes from th’ambassador that was bound for England; if your name be

Horatio, as  am let to know it is.


‘Horatio, when thou shalt have overlooked this, give these

fellows some means to the King. They have letters for him. Ere we were

two days old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave us

chase. Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on a compelled

valour, and in the grapple  boarded them. On the instant they got

clear of our ship, so  alone became their prisoner. They have dealt

with me like thieves of mercy. But they knew what they did;  am to do

a good turn for them. Let the King have the letters  have sent, and

repair thou to me with as much haste as thou wouldst fly death.  have

words to speak in thine ear will make thee dumb; yet are they much too

light for the bore of the matter. These good fellows will bring thee

where  am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern hold their course for England:

of them  have much to tell thee. Farewell.

He that thou knowest thine,

’

Come,  will give you way for these your letters,

And do’t the speedier, that you may direct me

To him from whom you brought them.


Another room in the Castle.



Now must your conscience my acquittance seal,

And you must put me in your heart for friend,

Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,

That he which hath your noble father slain

Pursu’d my life.


It well appears. But tell me

Why you proceeded not against these feats,

So crimeful and so capital in nature,

As by your safety, wisdom, all things else,

You mainly were stirr’d up.


, for two special reasons,

Which may to you, perhaps, seem much unsinew’d,

But yet to me they are strong. The Queen his mothe
Lives almost by his looks; and for myself,—

My virtue or my plague, be it either which,—

She’s so conjunctive to my life and soul,

That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,

could not but by her. The other motive,

Why to a public count  might not go,

Is the great love the general gender bear him,

Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,

Would like the spring that turneth wood to stone,

Convert his gyves to graces; so that my arrows,

Too slightly timber’d for so loud a wind,

Would have reverted to my bow again,

And not where  had aim’d them.


And so have  a noble father lost,

sister driven into desperate terms,

Whose worth, if praises may go back again,

Stood challenger on mount of all the age

For her perfections. But my revenge will come.


Break not your sleeps for that. You must not think

That we are made of stuff so flat and dull

That we can let our beard be shook with danger,

And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more.

lov’d your father, and we love ourself,

And that,  hope, will teach you to imagine—


How now? What news?


Letters, my lord, from Hamlet.

This to your Majesty; this to the Queen.


From Hamlet! Who brought them?


Sailors, my lord, they say;  saw them not.

They were given me by Claudio. He receiv’d them

Of him that brought them.


Laertes, you shall hear them.

Leave us.


‘High and mighty, you shall know  am set naked on you
kingdom. Tomorrow shall  beg leave to see your kingly eyes. When 

shall, first asking your pardon thereunto, recount the occasions of my

sudden and more strange return.

’

What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?

Or is it some abuse, and no such thing?


Know you the hand?


’Tis Hamlet’s character. ‘Naked!’

And in a postscript here he says ‘alone.’

Can you advise me?


am lost in it, my lord. But let him come,

It warms the very sickness in my heart

That  shall live and tell him to his teeth,

‘Thus diest thou.’


If it be so, Laertes,—

As how should it be so? How otherwise?—

Will you be rul’d by me?


Ay, my lord;

So you will not o’errule me to a peace.


To thine own peace. If he be now return’d,

As checking at his voyage, and that he means

No more to undertake it,  will work him

To exploit, now ripe in my device,

Under the which he shall not choose but fall;

And for his death no wind shall breathe,

But even his mother shall uncharge the practice

And call it accident.


My lord,  will be rul’d;

The rather if you could devise it so

That  might be the organ.


It falls right.

You have been talk’d of since your travel much,

And that in Hamlet’s hearing, for a quality

Wherein they say you shine. Your sum of parts

Did not together pluck such envy from him

As did that one, and that, in my regard,

Of the unworthiest siege.


What part is that, my lord?


very riband in the cap of youth,

Yet needful too, for youth no less becomes

The light and careless livery that it wears

Than settled age his sables and his weeds,

Importing health and graveness. Two months since

Here was a gentleman of Normandy,—

’ve seen myself, and serv’d against, the French,

And they can well on horseback, but this gallant

Had witchcraft in’t. He grew unto his seat,

And to such wondrous doing brought his horse,

As had he been incorps’d and demi-natur’d

With the brave beast. So far he topp’d my thought

That  in forgery of shapes and tricks,

Come short of what he did.


Norman was’t?


Norman.


Upon my life, Lamond.


The very same.


know him well. He is the brooch indeed

And gem of all the nation.


He made confession of you,

And gave you such a masterly report

For art and exercise in your defence,

And for your rapier most especially,

That he cried out ’twould be a sight indeed

If one could match you. The scrimers of their nation

He swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye,

If you oppos’d them. Sir, this report of his

Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy

That he could nothing do but wish and beg

Your sudden coming o’er to play with him.

Now, out of this,—


What out of this, my lord?


Laertes, was your father dear to you?

Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,

face without a heart?


Why ask you this?


Not that  think you did not love your father,

But that  know love is begun by time,

And that  see, in passages of proof,

Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.

There lives within the very flame of love

kind of wick or snuff that will abate it;

And nothing is at a like goodness still,

For goodness, growing to a pleurisy,

Dies in his own too much. That we would do,

We should do when we would; for this ‘would’ changes,

And hath abatements and delays as many

As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;

And then this ‘should’ is like a spendthrift sigh

That hurts by easing. But to the quick o’ th’ulcer:

Hamlet comes back: what would you undertake

To show yourself your father’s son in deed,

More than in words?


To cut his throat i’ th’ church.


No place, indeed, should murder sanctuarize;

Revenge should have no bounds. But good Laertes,

Will you do this, keep close within your chamber.

Hamlet return’d shall know you are come home:

We’ll put on those shall praise your excellence,

And set a double varnish on the fame

The Frenchman gave you, bring you in fine togethe
And wager on your heads. He, being remiss,

Most generous, and free from all contriving,

Will not peruse the foils; so that with ease,

Or with a little shuffling, you may choose

sword unbated, and in a pass of practice,

Requite him for your father.


will do’t.

And for that purpose ’ll anoint my sword.

bought an unction of a mountebank

So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,

Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,

Collected from all simples that have virtue

Under the moon, can save the thing from death

This is but scratch’d withal. ’ll touch my point

With this contagion, that if  gall him slightly,

It may be death.


Let’s further think of this,

Weigh what convenience both of time and means

May fit us to our shape. If this should fail,

And that our drift look through our bad performance.

’Twere better not assay’d. Therefore this project

Should have a back or second, that might hold

If this did blast in proof. Soft, let me see.

We’ll make a solemn wager on your cunnings,—

ha’t! When in your motion you are hot and dry,

As make your bouts more violent to that end,

And that he calls for drink, ’ll have prepar’d him

chalice for the nonce; whereon but sipping,

If he by chance escape your venom’d stuck,

Our purpose may hold there.


How now, sweet Queen?


One woe doth tread upon another’s heel,

So fast they follow. Your sister’s drown’d, Laertes.


Drown’d! , where?


There is a willow grows aslant a brook,

That shows his hoary leaves in the glassy stream.

There with fantastic garlands did she make

Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples,

That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,

But our cold maids do dead men’s fingers call them.

There on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds

Clamb’ring to hang, an envious sliver broke,

When down her weedy trophies and herself

Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide,

And mermaid-like, awhile they bore her up,

Which time she chaunted snatches of old tunes,

As one incapable of her own distress,

Or like a creature native and indued

Unto that element. But long it could not be

Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,

Pull’d the poor wretch from her melodious lay

To muddy death.


Alas, then she is drown’d?


Drown’d, drown’d.


Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,

And therefore  forbid my tears. But yet

It is our trick; nature her custom holds,

Let shame say what it will. When these are gone,

The woman will be out. Adieu, my lord,

have a speech of fire, that fain would blaze,

But that this folly douts it.



Let’s follow, Gertrude;

How much  had to do to calm his rage!

Now fear  this will give it start again;

Therefore let’s follow.



.  churchyard.



Is she to be buried in Christian burial, when she wilfully seeks he
own salvation?


tell thee she is, and therefore make her grave straight. The crowne
hath sat on her, and finds it Christian burial.


How can that be, unless she drowned herself in her own defence?


Why, ’tis found so.


It must be _se offendendo_, it cannot be else. For here lies the point:

if  drown myself wittingly, it argues an act: and an act hath three

branches. It is to act, to do, and to perform: argal, she drowned

herself wittingly.


Nay, but hear you, goodman delver,—


Give me leave. Here lies the water; good. Here stands the man; good. If

the man go to this water and drown himself, it is, will he nill he, he

goes,—mark you that. But if the water come to him and drown him, he

drowns not himself. Argal, he that is not guilty of his own death

shortens not his own life.


But is this law?


Ay, marry, is’t, crowner’s quest law.


Will you ha’ the truth on’t? If this had not been a gentlewoman, she

should have been buried out o’ Christian burial.


Why, there thou say’st. And the more pity that great folk should have

countenance in this world to drown or hang themselves more than thei
even Christian. Come, my spade. There is no ancient gentlemen but

gardeners, ditchers, and grave-makers: they hold up Adam’s profession.


Was he a gentleman?


He was the first that ever bore arms.


Why, he had none.


What, art a heathen? How dost thou understand the Scripture? The

Scripture says Adam digg’d. Could he dig without arms? ’ll put anothe
question to thee. If thou answerest me not to the purpose, confess

thyself—


Go to.


What is he that builds stronger than either the mason, the shipwright,

or the carpenter?


The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a thousand tenants.


like thy wit well in good faith, the gallows does well. But how does

it well? It does well to those that do ill. Now, thou dost ill to say

the gallows is built stronger than the church; argal, the gallows may

do well to thee. To’t again, come.


Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright, or a carpenter?


Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.


Marry, now  can tell.


To’t.


Mass,  cannot tell.



Cudgel thy brains no more about it, for your dull ass will not mend his

pace with beating; and when you are asked this question next, say ‘a

grave-maker’. The houses he makes last till doomsday. Go, get thee to

Yaughan; fetch me a stoup of liquor.



In youth when  did love, did love,

Methought it was very sweet;

To contract, , the time for, a, my behove,

methought there was nothing meet.


Has this fellow no feeling of his business, that he sings at

grave-making?


Custom hath made it in him a property of easiness.


’Tis e’en so; the hand of little employment hath the daintier sense.



But age with his stealing steps

Hath claw’d me in his clutch,

And hath shipp’d me into the land,

As if  had never been such.



That skull had a tongue in it, and could sing once. How the knave jowls

it to th’ ground, as if ’twere Cain’s jawbone, that did the first

murder! This might be the pate of a politician which this ass now

o’er-offices, one that would circumvent God, might it not?


It might, my lord.


Or of a courtier, which could say ‘Good morrow, sweet lord! How dost

thou, good lord?’ This might be my lord such-a-one, that praised my

lord such-a-one’s horse when he meant to beg it, might it not?


Ay, my lord.


Why, e’en so: and now my Lady Worm’s; chapless, and knocked about the

mazard with a sexton’s spade. Here’s fine revolution, an we had the

trick to see’t. Did these bones cost no more the breeding but to play

at loggets with ’em? Mine ache to think on’t.



pickaxe and a spade, a spade,

For and a shrouding-sheet;

, a pit of clay for to be made

For such a guest is meet.



There’s another. Why may not that be the skull of a lawyer? Where be

his quiddits now, his quillets, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks?

Why does he suffer this rude knave now to knock him about the sconce

with a dirty shovel, and will not tell him of his action of battery?

Hum. This fellow might be in’s time a great buyer of land, with his

statutes, his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers, his

recoveries. Is this the fine of his fines, and the recovery of his

recoveries, to have his fine pate full of fine dirt? Will his vouchers

vouch him no more of his purchases, and double ones too, than the

length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The very conveyances of his

lands will scarcely lie in this box; and must the inheritor himself

have no more, ha?


Not a jot more, my lord.


Is not parchment made of sheep-skins?


Ay, my lord, and of calf-skins too.


They are sheep and calves which seek out assurance in that.  will

speak to this fellow.—Whose grave’s this, sir?


Mine, sir.


, a pit of clay for to be made

For such a guest is meet.


think it be thine indeed, for thou liest in’t.


You lie out on’t, sir, and therefore ’tis not yours.

For my part,  do not lie in’t, yet it is mine.


Thou dost lie in’t, to be in’t and say it is thine. ’Tis for the dead,

not for the quick; therefore thou liest.


’Tis a quick lie, sir; ’t will away again from me to you.


What man dost thou dig it for?


For no man, sir.


What woman then?


For none neither.


Who is to be buried in’t?


One that was a woman, sir; but, rest her soul, she’s dead.


How absolute the knave is! We must speak by the card, or equivocation

will undo us. By the Lord, Horatio, these three years  have taken note

of it, the age is grown so picked that the toe of the peasant comes so

near the heel of the courtier he galls his kibe.—How long hast thou

been a grave-maker?


Of all the days i’ th’ year,  came to’t that day that our last King

Hamlet o’ercame Fortinbras.


How long is that since?


Cannot you tell that? Every fool can tell that. It was the very day

that young Hamlet was born,—he that is mad, and sent into England.


Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?


Why, because he was mad; he shall recover his wits there; or if he do

not, it’s no great matter there.


Why?


’Twill not be seen in him there; there the men are as mad as he.


How came he mad?


Very strangely, they say.


How strangely?


Faith, e’en with losing his wits.


Upon what ground?


Why, here in Denmark.  have been sexton here, man and boy, thirty

years.


How long will a man lie i’ th’earth ere he rot?


Faith, if he be not rotten before he die,—as we have many pocky corses

nowadays that will scarce hold the laying in,—he will last you some

eight year or nine year.  tanner will last you nine year.


Why he more than another?


Why, sir, his hide is so tann’d with his trade that he will keep out

water a great while. And your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson

dead body. Here’s a skull now; this skull hath lain in the earth

three-and-twenty years.


Whose was it?


whoreson, mad fellow’s it was. Whose do you think it was?


Nay,  know not.


pestilence on him for a mad rogue!  pour’d a flagon of Rhenish on my

head once. This same skull, sir, was Yorick’s skull, the King’s jester.


This?


’en that.


Let me see.  Alas, poor Yorick.  knew him,

Horatio, a fellow of infinite jest, of most excellent fancy. He hath

borne me on his back a thousand times; and now, how abhorred in my

imagination it is! My gorge rises at it. Here hung those lips that 

have kiss’d  know not how oft. Where be your gibes now? your gambols?

your songs? your flashes of merriment, that were wont to set the table

on a roar? Not one now, to mock your own grinning? Quite chop-fallen?

Now get you to my lady’s chamber, and tell her, let her paint an inch

thick, to this favour she must come. Make her laugh at that.—Prythee,

Horatio, tell me one thing.


What’s that, my lord?


Dost thou think Alexander looked o’ this fashion i’ th’earth?


’en so.


And smelt so? Pah!



’en so, my lord.


To what base uses we may return, Horatio! Why may not imagination trace

the noble dust of Alexander till he find it stopping a bung-hole?


’Twere to consider too curiously to consider so.


No, faith, not a jot. But to follow him thither with modesty enough,

and likelihood to lead it; as thus. Alexander died, Alexander was

buried, Alexander returneth into dust; the dust is earth; of earth we

make loam; and why of that loam whereto he was converted might they not

stop a beer-barrel?

Imperious Caesar, dead and turn’d to clay,

Might stop a hole to keep the wind away.

, that that earth which kept the world in awe

Should patch a wall t’expel the winter’s flaw.

But soft! but soft! aside! Here comes the King.


Mourners following; King, Queen, their Trains, &c.

The Queen, the courtiers. Who is that they follow?

And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken

The corse they follow did with desperate hand

Fordo it own life. ’Twas of some estate.

Couch we awhile and mark.



What ceremony else?


That is Laertes, a very noble youth. Mark.


What ceremony else?


Her obsequies have been as far enlarg’d

As we have warranties. Her death was doubtful;

And but that great command o’ersways the order,

She should in ground unsanctified have lodg’d

Till the last trumpet. For charitable prayers,

Shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on her.

Yet here she is allowed her virgin rites,

Her maiden strewments, and the bringing home

Of bell and burial.


Must there no more be done?


No more be done.

We should profane the service of the dead

To sing sage requiem and such rest to he
As to peace-parted souls.


Lay her i’ th’earth,

And from her fair and unpolluted flesh

May violets spring.  tell thee, churlish priest,

minist’ring angel shall my sister be

When thou liest howling.


What, the fair Ophelia?


Sweets to the sweet. Farewell.

hop’d thou shouldst have been my Hamlet’s wife;

thought thy bride-bed to have deck’d, sweet maid,

And not have strew’d thy grave.


, treble woe

Fall ten times treble on that cursed head

Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense

Depriv’d thee of. Hold off the earth a while,

Till  have caught her once more in mine arms.


Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,

Till of this flat a mountain you have made,

To o’ertop old Pelion or the skyish head

Of blue Olympus.



What is he whose grief

Bears such an emphasis? whose phrase of sorrow

Conjures the wand’ring stars, and makes them stand

Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is ,

Hamlet the Dane.



The devil take thy soul!


Thou pray’st not well.

prythee take thy fingers from my throat;

For though  am not splenative and rash,

Yet have  in me something dangerous,

Which let thy wiseness fear. Away thy hand!


Pluck them asunder.


Hamlet! Hamlet!

All.

Gentlemen!


Good my lord, be quiet.



Why,  will fight with him upon this theme

Until my eyelids will no longer wag.


my son, what theme?


lov’d Ophelia; forty thousand brothers

Could not, with all their quantity of love,

Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?


, he is mad, Laertes.


For love of God forbear him!


’Swounds, show me what thou’lt do:

Woul’t weep? woul’t fight? woul’t fast? woul’t tear thyself?

Woul’t drink up eisel? eat a crocodile?

’ll do’t. Dost thou come here to whine?

To outface me with leaping in her grave?

Be buried quick with her, and so will .

And if thou prate of mountains, let them throw

Millions of acres on us, till our ground,

Singeing his pate against the burning zone,

Make Ossa like a wart. Nay, an thou’lt mouth,

’ll rant as well as thou.


This is mere madness:

And thus awhile the fit will work on him;

Anon, as patient as the female dove,

When that her golden couplets are disclos’d,

His silence will sit drooping.


Hear you, sir;

What is the reason that you use me thus?

lov’d you ever. But it is no matter.

Let Hercules himself do what he may,

The cat will mew, and dog will have his day.



pray thee, good Horatio, wait upon him.



Strengthen your patience in our last night’s speech;

We’ll put the matter to the present push.—

Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.

This grave shall have a living monument.

An hour of quiet shortly shall we see;

Till then in patience our proceeding be.


hall in the Castle.



So much for this, sir. Now let me see the other;

You do remember all the circumstance?


Remember it, my lord!


Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting

That would not let me sleep. Methought  lay

Worse than the mutinies in the bilboes. Rashly,

And prais’d be rashness for it,—let us know,

Our indiscretion sometime serves us well,

When our deep plots do pall; and that should teach us

There’s a divinity that shapes our ends,

Rough-hew them how we will.


That is most certain.


Up from my cabin,

My sea-gown scarf’d about me, in the dark

Grop’d  to find out them; had my desire,

Finger’d their packet, and in fine, withdrew

To mine own room again, making so bold,

My fears forgetting manners, to unseal

Their grand commission; where  found, Horatio,

Oh royal knavery! an exact command,

Larded with many several sorts of reasons,

Importing Denmark’s health, and England’s too,

With ho! such bugs and goblins in my life,

That on the supervise, no leisure bated,

No, not to stay the grinding of the axe,

My head should be struck off.


Is’t possible?


Here’s the commission, read it at more leisure.

But wilt thou hear me how  did proceed?


beseech you.


Being thus benetted round with villanies,—

Or  could make a prologue to my brains,

They had begun the play,— sat me down,

Devis’d a new commission, wrote it fair:

once did hold it, as our statists do,

baseness to write fair, and labour’d much

How to forget that learning; but, sir, now

It did me yeoman’s service. Wilt thou know

The effect of what  wrote?


Ay, good my lord.


An earnest conjuration from the King,

As England was his faithful tributary,

As love between them like the palm might flourish,

As peace should still her wheaten garland wea
And stand a comma ’tween their amities,

And many such-like ‘as’es of great charge,

That on the view and know of these contents,

Without debatement further, more or less,

He should the bearers put to sudden death,

Not shriving-time allow’d.


How was this seal’d?


Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.

had my father’s signet in my purse,

Which was the model of that Danish seal:

Folded the writ up in the form of the other,

Subscrib’d it: gave’t th’impression; plac’d it safely,

The changeling never known. Now, the next day

Was our sea-fight, and what to this was sequent

Thou know’st already.


So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to’t.


Why, man, they did make love to this employment.

They are not near my conscience; their defeat

Does by their own insinuation grow.

’Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes

Between the pass and fell incensed points

Of mighty opposites.


Why, what a king is this!


Does it not, thinks’t thee, stand me now upon,—

He that hath kill’d my king, and whor’d my mother,

Popp’d in between th’election and my hopes,

Thrown out his angle for my proper life,

And with such cozenage—is’t not perfect conscience

To quit him with this arm? And is’t not to be damn’d

To let this canker of our nature come

In further evil?


It must be shortly known to him from England

What is the issue of the business there.


It will be short. The interim is mine;

And a man’s life’s no more than to say ‘One’.

But  am very sorry, good Horatio,

That to Laertes  forgot myself;

For by the image of my cause  see

The portraiture of his. ’ll court his favours.

But sure the bravery of his grief did put me

Into a tow’ring passion.


Peace, who comes here?



Your lordship is right welcome back to Denmark.


humbly thank you, sir. Dost know this waterfly?


No, my good lord.


Thy state is the more gracious; for ’tis a vice to know him. He hath

much land, and fertile; let a beast be lord of beasts, and his crib

shall stand at the king’s mess; ’tis a chough; but, as  say, spacious

in the possession of dirt.


Sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure,  should impart a thing

to you from his Majesty.


will receive it with all diligence of spirit. Put your bonnet to his

right use; ’tis for the head.


thank your lordship, ’tis very hot.


No, believe me, ’tis very cold, the wind is northerly.


It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.


Methinks it is very sultry and hot for my complexion.


Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry,—as ’twere— cannot tell how.

But, my lord, his Majesty bade me signify to you that he has laid a

great wager on your head. Sir, this is the matter,—


beseech you, remember,—



Nay, in good faith; for mine ease, in good faith. Sir, here is newly

come to court Laertes; believe me, an absolute gentleman, full of most

excellent differences, of very soft society and great showing. Indeed,

to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or calendar of gentry; fo
you shall find in him the continent of what part a gentleman would see.


Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in you, though  know, to

divide him inventorially would dizzy th’arithmetic of memory, and yet

but yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the verity of

extolment,  take him to be a soul of great article and his infusion of

such dearth and rareness as, to make true diction of him, his semblable

is his mirror and who else would trace him his umbrage, nothing more.


Your lordship speaks most infallibly of him.


The concernancy, sir? Why do we wrap the gentleman in our more rawe
breath?


Sir?


Is’t not possible to understand in another tongue? You will do’t, sir,

really.


What imports the nomination of this gentleman?


Of Laertes?


His purse is empty already, all’s golden words are spent.


Of him, sir.


know you are not ignorant,—


would you did, sir; yet in faith if you did, it would not much

approve me. Well, sir?


You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is,—


dare not confess that, lest  should compare with him in excellence;

but to know a man well were to know himself.


mean, sir, for his weapon; but in the imputation laid on him, by them

in his meed he’s unfellowed.


What’s his weapon?


Rapier and dagger.


That’s two of his weapons. But well.


The King, sir, hath wager’d with him six Barbary horses, against the

which he has imponed, as  take it, six French rapiers and poniards,

with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so. Three of the carriages,

in faith, are very dear to fancy, very responsive to the hilts, most

delicate carriages, and of very liberal conceit.


What call you the carriages?


knew you must be edified by the margin ere you had done.


The carriages, sir, are the hangers.


The phrase would be more german to the matter if we could carry cannon

by our sides.  would it might be hangers till then. But on. Six

Barbary horses against six French swords, their assigns, and three

liberal conceited carriages: that’s the French bet against the Danish.

Why is this all imponed, as you call it?


The King, sir, hath laid that in a dozen passes between you and him, he

shall not exceed you three hits. He hath laid on twelve for nine. And

it would come to immediate trial if your lordship would vouchsafe the

answer.


How if  answer no?


mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial.


Sir,  will walk here in the hall. If it please his Majesty, it is the

breathing time of day with me. Let the foils be brought, the gentleman

willing, and the King hold his purpose,  will win for him if  can; if

not,  will gain nothing but my shame and the odd hits.


Shall  re-deliver you e’en so?


To this effect, sir; after what flourish your nature will.


commend my duty to your lordship.


Yours, yours.


He does well to commend it himself, there are no tongues else for’s

turn.


This lapwing runs away with the shell on his head.


He did comply with his dug before he suck’d it. Thus has he,—and many

more of the same bevy that  know the drossy age dotes on,— only got

the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter; a kind of yeasty

collection, which carries them through and through the most fanned and

winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to their trial, the bubbles are

out,



My lord, his Majesty commended him to you by young Osric, who brings

back to him that you attend him in the hall. He sends to know if you
pleasure hold to play with Laertes or that you will take longer time.


am constant to my purposes, they follow the King’s pleasure. If his

fitness speaks, mine is ready. Now or whensoever, provided  be so able

as now.


The King and Queen and all are coming down.


In happy time.


The Queen desires you to use some gentle entertainment to Laertes

before you fall to play.


She well instructs me.



You will lose this wager, my lord.


do not think so. Since he went into France,  have been in continual

practice.  shall win at the odds. But thou wouldst not think how ill

all’s here about my heart: but it is no matter.


Nay, good my lord.


It is but foolery; but it is such a kind of gain-giving as would

perhaps trouble a woman.


If your mind dislike anything, obey it.  will forestall their repai
hither, and say you are not fit.


Not a whit, we defy augury. There’s a special providence in the fall of

a sparrow. If it be now, ’tis not to come; if it be not to come, it

will be now; if it be not now, yet it will come. The readiness is all.

Since no man has aught of what he leaves, what is’t to leave betimes?



Come, Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me.



Give me your pardon, sir.  have done you wrong;

But pardon’t as you are a gentleman.

This presence knows, and you must needs have heard,

How  am punish’d with sore distraction.

What  have done

That might your nature, honour, and exception

Roughly awake,  here proclaim was madness.

Was’t Hamlet wrong’d Laertes? Never Hamlet.

If Hamlet from himself be ta’en away,

And when he’s not himself does wrong Laertes,

Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it.

Who does it, then? His madness. If’t be so,

Hamlet is of the faction that is wrong’d;

His madness is poor Hamlet’s enemy.

Sir, in this audience,

Let my disclaiming from a purpos’d evil

Free me so far in your most generous thoughts

That  have shot my arrow o’er the house

And hurt my brother.


am satisfied in nature,

Whose motive in this case should stir me most

To my revenge. But in my terms of honou
stand aloof, and will no reconcilement

Till by some elder masters of known honou
have a voice and precedent of peace

To keep my name ungor’d. But till that time

do receive your offer’d love like love,

And will not wrong it.


embrace it freely,

And will this brother’s wager frankly play.—

Give us the foils; come on.


Come, one for me.


’ll be your foil, Laertes; in mine ignorance

Your skill shall like a star i’ th’ darkest night,

Stick fiery off indeed.


You mock me, sir.


No, by this hand.


Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,

You know the wager?


Very well, my lord.

Your Grace has laid the odds o’ the weaker side.


do not fear it.  have seen you both;

But since he is better’d, we have therefore odds.


This is too heavy. Let me see another.


This likes me well. These foils have all a length?



Ay, my good lord.


Set me the stoups of wine upon that table.

If Hamlet give the first or second hit,

Or quit in answer of the third exchange,

Let all the battlements their ordnance fire;

The King shall drink to Hamlet’s better breath,

And in the cup an union shall he throw

Richer than that which four successive kings

In Denmark’s crown have worn. Give me the cups;

And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,

The trumpet to the cannoneer without,

The cannons to the heavens, the heavens to earth,

‘Now the King drinks to Hamlet.’ Come, begin.

And you, the judges, bear a wary eye.


Come on, sir.


Come, my lord.



One.


No.


Judgment.


hit, a very palpable hit.


Well; again.


Stay, give me drink. Hamlet, this pearl is thine;

Here’s to thy health.


Give him the cup.


’ll play this bout first; set it by awhile.


Come. Another hit; what say you?


touch, a touch,  do confess.


Our son shall win.


He’s fat, and scant of breath.

Here, Hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows.

The Queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.


Good madam.


Gertrude, do not drink.


will, my lord;  pray you pardon me.


It is the poison’d cup; it is too late.


dare not drink yet, madam. By and by.


Come, let me wipe thy face.


My lord, ’ll hit him now.


do not think’t.


And yet ’tis almost ’gainst my conscience.


Come for the third, Laertes. You do but dally.

pray you pass with your best violence.

am afeard you make a wanton of me.


Say you so? Come on.



Nothing neither way.


Have at you now.

[_Laertes wounds Hamlet; then, in scuffling, they change rapiers, and

Hamlet wounds Laertes._]


Part them; they are incens’d.


Nay, come again!



Look to the Queen there, ho!


They bleed on both sides. How is it, my lord?


How is’t, Laertes?


Why, as a woodcock to my own springe, Osric.

am justly kill’d with mine own treachery.


How does the Queen?


She swoons to see them bleed.


No, no, the drink, the drink!  my dear Hamlet!

The drink, the drink!  am poison’d.



villany! Ho! Let the door be lock’d:

Treachery! Seek it out.



It is here, Hamlet. Hamlet, thou art slain.

No medicine in the world can do thee good.

In thee there is not half an hour of life;

The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,

Unbated and envenom’d. The foul practice

Hath turn’d itself on me. Lo, here  lie,

Never to rise again. Thy mother’s poison’d.

can no more. The King, the King’s to blame.


The point envenom’d too!

Then, venom, to thy work.


and 

Treason! treason!


yet defend me, friends.  am but hurt.


Here, thou incestuous, murderous, damned Dane,

Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?

Follow my mother.



He is justly serv’d.

It is a poison temper’d by himself.

Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet.

Mine and my father’s death come not upon thee,

Nor thine on me.



Heaven make thee free of it!  follow thee.

am dead, Horatio. Wretched Queen, adieu.

You that look pale and tremble at this chance,

That are but mutes or audience to this act,

Had  but time,—as this fell sergeant, death,

Is strict in his arrest,—,  could tell you,—

But let it be. Horatio,  am dead,

Thou liv’st; report me and my cause aright

To the unsatisfied.


Never believe it.

am more an antique Roman than a Dane.

Here’s yet some liquor left.


As th’art a man,

Give me the cup. Let go; by Heaven, ’ll have’t.

good Horatio, what a wounded name,

Things standing thus unknown, shall live behind me.

If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart,

Absent thee from felicity awhile,

And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain,

To tell my story.


What warlike noise is this?


Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,

To the ambassadors of England gives

This warlike volley.


,  die, Horatio.

The potent poison quite o’er-crows my spirit:

cannot live to hear the news from England,

But  do prophesy th’election lights

On Fortinbras. He has my dying voice.

So tell him, with the occurrents more and less,

Which have solicited. The rest is silence.



Now cracks a noble heart. Good night, sweet prince,

And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest.

Why does the drum come hither?




Where is this sight?


What is it you would see?

If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.


This quarry cries on havoc.  proud death,

What feast is toward in thine eternal cell,

That thou so many princes at a shot

So bloodily hast struck?


The sight is dismal;

And our affairs from England come too late.

The ears are senseless that should give us hearing,

To tell him his commandment is fulfill’d,

That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead.

Where should we have our thanks?


Not from his mouth,

Had it th’ability of life to thank you.

He never gave commandment for their death.

But since, so jump upon this bloody question,

You from the Polack wars, and you from England

Are here arriv’d, give order that these bodies

High on a stage be placed to the view,

And let me speak to th’ yet unknowing world

How these things came about. So shall you hea
Of carnal, bloody and unnatural acts,

Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters,

Of deaths put on by cunning and forc’d cause,

And, in this upshot, purposes mistook

Fall’n on the inventors’ heads. All this can 

Truly deliver.


Let us haste to hear it,

And call the noblest to the audience.

For me, with sorrow  embrace my fortune.

have some rights of memory in this kingdom,

Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.


Of that  shall have also cause to speak,

And from his mouth whose voice will draw on more.

But let this same be presently perform’d,

Even while men’s minds are wild, lest more mischance

On plots and errors happen.


Let four captains

Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage,

For he was likely, had he been put on,

To have prov’d most royally; and for his passage,

The soldiers’ music and the rites of wa
Speak loudly for him.

Take up the bodies. Such a sight as this

Becomes the field, but here shows much amiss.

Go, bid the soldiers shoot.


[_Exeunt, bearing off the bodies, after which a peal of ordnance is

shot off._]