

for a Muse of fire, that would ascend

The brightest heaven of invention,

kingdom for a stage, princes to act,

And monarchs to behold the swelling scene!

Then should the warlike Harry, like himself,

Assume the port of Mars, and at his heels,

Leash’d in like hounds, should famine, sword, and fire

Crouch for employment. But pardon, gentles all,

The flat unraised spirits that hath dar’d

On this unworthy scaffold to bring forth

So great an object. Can this cockpit hold

The vasty fields of France? Or may we cram

Within this wooden  the very casques

That did affright the air at Agincourt?

pardon! since a crooked figure may

Attest in little place a million,

And let us, ciphers to this great accompt,

On your imaginary forces work.

Suppose within the girdle of these walls

Are now confin’d two mighty monarchies,

Whose high upreared and abutting fronts

The perilous narrow ocean parts asunder;

Piece out our imperfections with your thoughts.

Into a thousand parts divide one man,

And make imaginary puissance.

Think, when we talk of horses, that you see them

Printing their proud hoofs i’ th’ receiving earth.

For ’tis your thoughts that now must deck our kings,

Carry them here and there, jumping o’er times,

Turning the accomplishment of many years

Into an hour-glass: for the which supply,

Admit me Chorus to this history;

Who prologue-like your humble patience pray,

Gently to hear, kindly to judge, our play.



. London. An ante-chamber in the King’s palace.



My lord, ’ll tell you, that self bill is urg’d

Which in the eleventh year of the last king’s reign

Was like, and had indeed against us passed

But that the scambling and unquiet time

Did push it out of farther question.


But how, my lord, shall we resist it now?


It must be thought on. If it pass against us,

We lose the better half of our possession:

For all the temporal lands, which men devout

By testament have given to the Church,

Would they strip from us; being valu’d thus:

As much as would maintain, to the King’s honour,

Full fifteen earls and fifteen hundred knights,

Six thousand and two hundred good esquires;

And, to relief of lazars and weak age,

Of indigent faint souls past corporal toil,

hundred almshouses right well supplied;

And to the coffers of the King beside,

thousand pounds by th’ year. Thus runs the bill.


This would drink deep.


’Twould drink the cup and all.


But what prevention?


The King is full of grace and fair regard.


And a true lover of the holy Church.


The courses of his youth promis’d it not.

The breath no sooner left his father’s body

But that his wildness, mortified in him,

Seemed to die too; yea, at that very moment

Consideration like an angel came

And whipped th’ offending Adam out of him,

Leaving his body as a paradise

’ envelope and contain celestial spirits.

Never was such a sudden scholar made,

Never came reformation in a flood

With such a heady currance scouring faults,

Nor never Hydra-headed wilfulness

So soon did lose his seat, and all at once,

As in this king.


We are blessed in the change.


Hear him but reason in divinity

And, all-admiring, with an inward wish

You would desire the King were made a prelate;

Hear him debate of commonwealth affairs,

You would say it hath been all in all his study;

List his discourse of war, and you shall hea
fearful battle rendered you in music;

Turn him to any cause of policy,

The Gordian knot of it he will unloose,

Familiar as his garter; that, when he speaks,

The air, a chartered libertine, is still,

And the mute wonder lurketh in men’s ears

To steal his sweet and honeyed sentences;

So that the art and practic part of life

Must be the mistress to this theoric:

Which is a wonder how his Grace should glean it,

Since his addiction was to courses vain,

His companies unlettered, rude, and shallow,

His hours filled up with riots, banquets, sports,

And never noted in him any study,

Any retirement, any sequestration

From open haunts and popularity.


The strawberry grows underneath the nettle,

And wholesome berries thrive and ripen best

Neighboured by fruit of baser quality;

And so the Prince obscured his contemplation

Under the veil of wildness, which, no doubt,

Grew like the summer grass, fastest by night,

Unseen, yet crescive in his faculty.


It must be so, for miracles are ceased,

And therefore we must needs admit the means

How things are perfected.


But, my good lord,

How now for mitigation of this bill

Urged by the Commons? Doth his Majesty

Incline to it, or no?


He seems indifferent,

Or rather swaying more upon our part

Than cherishing th’ exhibitors against us;

For  have made an offer to his Majesty,

Upon our spiritual convocation

And in regard of causes now in hand,

Which  have opened to his Grace at large,

As touching France, to give a greater sum

Than ever at one time the clergy yet

Did to his predecessors part withal.


How did this offer seem received, my lord?


With good acceptance of his Majesty;

Save that there was not time enough to hear,

As  perceived his Grace would fain have done,

The severals and unhidden passages

Of his true titles to some certain dukedoms,

And generally to the crown and seat of France,

Derived from Edward, his great-grandfather.


What was th’ impediment that broke this off?


The French ambassador upon that instant

Craved audience; and the hour,  think, is come

To give him hearing. Is it four o’clock?


It is.


Then go we in, to know his embassy,

Which  could with a ready guess declare

Before the Frenchman speak a word of it.


’ll wait upon you, and  long to hear it.


The same. The presence chamber.


Exeter and Attendants.


Where is my gracious Lord of Canterbury?


Not here in presence.


Send for him, good uncle.


Shall we call in th’ ambassador, my liege?


Not yet, my cousin. We would be resolved,

Before we hear him, of some things of weight

That task our thoughts concerning us and France.



God and his angels guard your sacred throne

And make you long become it!


Sure, we thank you.

My learned lord, we pray you to proceed

And justly and religiously unfold

Why the law Salic that they have in France

Or should or should not bar us in our claim.

And God forbid, my dear and faithful lord,

That you should fashion, wrest, or bow your reading,

Or nicely charge your understanding soul

With opening titles miscreate, whose right

Suits not in native colours with the truth;

For God doth know how many now in health

Shall drop their blood in approbation

Of what your reverence shall incite us to.

Therefore take heed how you impawn our person,

How you awake our sleeping sword of war.

We charge you in the name of God, take heed;

For never two such kingdoms did contend

Without much fall of blood, whose guiltless drops

Are every one a woe, a sore complaint

’Gainst him whose wrongs gives edge unto the swords

That makes such waste in brief mortality.

Under this conjuration speak, my lord,

For we will hear, note, and believe in heart

That what you speak is in your conscience washed

As pure as sin with baptism.


Then hear me, gracious sovereign, and you peers,

That owe yourselves, your lives, and services

To this imperial throne. There is no ba
To make against your Highness’ claim to France

But this, which they produce from Pharamond:

_In terram Salicam mulieres ne succedant_,

“No woman shall succeed in Salic land;”

Which Salic land the French unjustly gloze

To be the realm of France, and Pharamond

The founder of this law and female bar.

Yet their own authors faithfully affirm

That the land Salic is in Germany,

Between the floods of Sala and of Elbe;

Where Charles the Great, having subdu’d the Saxons,

There left behind and settled certain French;

Who, holding in disdain the German women

For some dishonest manners of their life,

Establish’d then this law, to wit, no female

Should be inheritrix in Salic land;

Which Salic, as  said, ’twixt Elbe and Sala,

Is at this day in Germany call’d Meissen.

Then doth it well appear the Salic law

Was not devised for the realm of France;

Nor did the French possess the Salic land

Until four hundred one and twenty years

After defunction of King Pharamond,

Idly suppos’d the founder of this law,

Who died within the year of our redemption

Four hundred twenty-six; and Charles the Great

Subdu’d the Saxons, and did seat the French

Beyond the river Sala, in the yea
Eight hundred five. Besides, their writers say,

King Pepin, which deposed Childeric,

Did, as heir general, being descended

Of Blithild, which was daughter to King Clothair,

Make claim and title to the crown of France.

Hugh Capet also, who usurp’d the crown

Of Charles the Duke of Lorraine, sole heir male

Of the true line and stock of Charles the Great,

To find his title with some shows of truth,

Though, in pure truth, it was corrupt and naught,

Convey’d himself as the heir to the Lady Lingare,

Daughter to Charlemain, who was the son

To Lewis the Emperor, and Lewis the son

Of Charles the Great. Also, King Lewis the Tenth,

Who was sole heir to the usurper Capet,

Could not keep quiet in his conscience,

Wearing the crown of France, till satisfied

That fair Queen Isabel, his grandmother,

Was lineal of the Lady Ermengare,

Daughter to Charles, the foresaid Duke of Lorraine;

By the which marriage the line of Charles the Great

Was re-united to the crown of France.

So that, as clear as is the summer’s sun,

King Pepin’s title and Hugh Capet’s claim,

King Lewis his satisfaction, all appea
To hold in right and title of the female.

So do the kings of France unto this day,

Howbeit they would hold up this Salic law

To bar your Highness claiming from the female,

And rather choose to hide them in a net

Than amply to imbar their crooked titles

Usurp’d from you and your progenitors.


May  with right and conscience make this claim?


The sin upon my head, dread sovereign!

For in the Book of Numbers is it writ,

“When the man dies, let the inheritance

Descend unto the daughter.” Gracious lord,

Stand for your own! Unwind your bloody flag!

Look back into your mighty ancestors!

Go, my dread lord, to your great-grandsire’s tomb,

From whom you claim; invoke his warlike spirit,

And your great-uncle’s, Edward the Black Prince,

Who on the French ground play’d a tragedy,

Making defeat on the full power of France,

Whiles his most mighty father on a hill

Stood smiling to behold his lion’s whelp

Forage in blood of French nobility.

noble English, that could entertain

With half their forces the full pride of France

And let another half stand laughing by,

All out of work and cold for action!


Awake remembrance of these valiant dead,

And with your puissant arm renew their feats.

You are their heir; you sit upon their throne;

The blood and courage that renowned them

Runs in your veins; and my thrice-puissant liege

Is in the very May-morn of his youth,

Ripe for exploits and mighty enterprises.


Your brother kings and monarchs of the earth

Do all expect that you should rouse yourself,

As did the former lions of your blood.


They know your Grace hath cause and means and might;

So hath your Highness. Never King of England

Had nobles richer, and more loyal subjects,

Whose hearts have left their bodies here in England

And lie pavilion’d in the fields of France.


, let their bodies follow, my dear liege,

With blood and sword and fire to win your right;

In aid whereof we of the spiritualty

Will raise your Highness such a mighty sum

As never did the clergy at one time

Bring in to any of your ancestors.


We must not only arm to invade the French,

But lay down our proportions to defend

Against the Scot, who will make road upon us

With all advantages.


They of those marches, gracious sovereign,

Shall be a wall sufficient to defend

Our inland from the pilfering borderers.


We do not mean the coursing snatchers only,

But fear the main intendment of the Scot,

Who hath been still a giddy neighbour to us;

For you shall read that my great-grandfathe
Never went with his forces into France

But that the Scot on his unfurnish’d kingdom

Came pouring, like the tide into a breach,

With ample and brim fullness of his force,

Galling the gleaned land with hot assays,

Girdling with grievous siege castles and towns;

That England, being empty of defence,

Hath shook and trembled at the ill neighbourhood.


She hath been then more fear’d than harm’d, my liege;

For hear her but exampl’d by herself:

When all her chivalry hath been in France,

And she a mourning widow of her nobles,

She hath herself not only well defended

But taken and impounded as a stray

The King of Scots; whom she did send to France

To fill King Edward’s fame with prisoner kings,

And make her chronicle as rich with praise

As is the ooze and bottom of the sea

With sunken wreck and sumless treasuries.


But there’s a saying very old and true,

“If that you will France win,

Then with Scotland first begin.”

For once the eagle England being in prey,

To her unguarded nest the weasel Scot

Comes sneaking and so sucks her princely eggs,

Playing the mouse in absence of the cat,

To tear and havoc more than she can eat.


It follows then the cat must stay at home;

Yet that is but a crush’d necessity,

Since we have locks to safeguard necessaries,

And pretty traps to catch the petty thieves.

While that the armed hand doth fight abroad,

The advised head defends itself at home;

For government, though high and low and lower,

Put into parts, doth keep in one consent,

Congreeing in a full and natural close,

Like music.


Therefore doth heaven divide

The state of man in divers functions,

Setting endeavour in continual motion,

To which is fixed, as an aim or butt,

Obedience; for so work the honey-bees,

Creatures that by a rule in nature teach

The act of order to a peopled kingdom.

They have a king and officers of sorts,

Where some, like magistrates, correct at home,

Others like merchants, venture trade abroad,

Others, like soldiers, armed in their stings,

Make boot upon the summer’s velvet buds,

Which pillage they with merry march bring home

To the tent-royal of their emperor;

Who, busied in his majesty, surveys

The singing masons building roofs of gold,

The civil citizens kneading up the honey,

The poor mechanic porters crowding in

Their heavy burdens at his narrow gate,

The sad-eyed justice, with his surly hum,

Delivering o’er to executors pale

The lazy yawning drone.  this infer,

That many things, having full reference

To one consent, may work contrariously.

As many arrows, loosed several ways,

Come to one mark; as many ways meet in one town;

As many fresh streams meet in one salt sea;

As many lines close in the dial’s centre;

So many a thousand actions, once afoot,

End in one purpose, and be all well borne

Without defeat. Therefore to France, my liege!

Divide your happy England into four,

Whereof take you one quarter into France,

And you withal shall make all Gallia shake.

If we, with thrice such powers left at home,

Cannot defend our own doors from the dog,

Let us be worried and our nation lose

The name of hardiness and policy.


Call in the messengers sent from the Dauphin.


Now are we well resolv’d; and, by God’s help,

And yours, the noble sinews of our power,

France being ours, we’ll bend it to our awe,

Or break it all to pieces. Or there we’ll sit,

Ruling in large and ample empery

’er France and all her almost kingly dukedoms,

Or lay these bones in an unworthy urn,

Tombless, with no remembrance over them.

Either our history shall with full mouth

Speak freely of our acts, or else our grave,

Like Turkish mute, shall have a tongueless mouth,

Not worshipp’d with a waxen epitaph.


Now are we well prepar’d to know the pleasure

Of our fair cousin Dauphin; for we hea
Your greeting is from him, not from the King.


May’t please your Majesty to give us leave

Freely to render what we have in charge,

Or shall we sparingly show you far off

The Dauphin’s meaning and our embassy?


We are no tyrant, but a Christian king,

Unto whose grace our passion is as subject

As is our wretches fett’red in our prisons;

Therefore with frank and with uncurbed plainness

Tell us the Dauphin’s mind.


Thus, then, in few.

Your Highness, lately sending into France,

Did claim some certain dukedoms, in the right

Of your great predecessor, King Edward the Third.

In answer of which claim, the prince our maste
Says that you savour too much of your youth,

And bids you be advis’d there’s nought in France

That can be with a nimble galliard won.

You cannot revel into dukedoms there.

He therefore sends you, meeter for your spirit,

This tun of treasure; and, in lieu of this,

Desires you let the dukedoms that you claim

Hear no more of you. This the Dauphin speaks.


What treasure, uncle?


Tennis-balls, my liege.


We are glad the Dauphin is so pleasant with us.

His present and your pains we thank you for.

When we have match’d our rackets to these balls,

We will, in France, by God’s grace, play a set

Shall strike his father’s crown into the hazard.

Tell him he hath made a match with such a wrangle
That all the courts of France will be disturb’d

With chaces. And we understand him well,

How he comes o’er us with our wilder days,

Not measuring what use we made of them.

We never valu’d this poor seat of England;

And therefore, living hence, did give ourself

To barbarous licence; as ’tis ever common

That men are merriest when they are from home.

But tell the Dauphin  will keep my state,

Be like a king, and show my sail of greatness

When  do rouse me in my throne of France.

For that  have laid by my majesty

And plodded like a man for working days,

But  will rise there with so full a glory

That  will dazzle all the eyes of France,

Yea, strike the Dauphin blind to look on us.

And tell the pleasant prince this mock of his

Hath turn’d his balls to gun-stones, and his soul

Shall stand sore charged for the wasteful vengeance

That shall fly with them; for many a thousand widows

Shall this his mock mock out of their dear husbands,

Mock mothers from their sons, mock castles down;

And some are yet ungotten and unborn

That shall have cause to curse the Dauphin’s scorn.

But this lies all within the will of God,

To whom  do appeal; and in whose name

Tell you the Dauphin  am coming on

To venge me as  may, and to put forth

My rightful hand in a well-hallow’d cause.

So get you hence in peace; and tell the Dauphin

His jest will savour but of shallow wit,

When thousands weep more than did laugh at it.—

Convey them with safe conduct.—Fare you well.



This was a merry message.


We hope to make the sender blush at it.

Therefore, my lords, omit no happy hou
That may give furtherance to our expedition;

For we have now no thought in us but France,

Save those to God, that run before our business.

Therefore, let our proportions for these wars

Be soon collected, and all things thought upon

That may with reasonable swiftness add

More feathers to our wings; for, God before,

We’ll chide this Dauphin at his father’s door.

Therefore let every man now task his thought,

That this fair action may on foot be brought.





Now all the youth of England are on fire,

And silken dalliance in the wardrobe lies.

Now thrive the armourers, and honour’s thought

Reigns solely in the breast of every man.

They sell the pasture now to buy the horse,

Following the mirror of all Christian kings,

With winged heels, as English Mercuries.

For now sits Expectation in the air,

And hides a sword from hilts unto the point

With crowns imperial, crowns, and coronets,

Promis’d to Harry and his followers.

The French, advis’d by good intelligence

Of this most dreadful preparation,

Shake in their fear, and with pale policy

Seek to divert the English purposes.

England! model to thy inward greatness,

Like little body with a mighty heart,

What mightst thou do, that honour would thee do,

Were all thy children kind and natural!

But see thy fault! France hath in thee found out

nest of hollow bosoms, which he fills

With treacherous crowns; and three corrupted men,

One, Richard Earl of Cambridge, and the second,

Henry Lord Scroop of Masham, and the third,

Sir Thomas Grey, knight of Northumberland,

Have, for the gilt of France,— guilt indeed!—

Confirm’d conspiracy with fearful France;

And by their hands this grace of kings must die,

If hell and treason hold their promises,

Ere he take ship for France, and in Southampton.

Linger your patience on, and we’ll digest

The abuse of distance, force a play.

The sum is paid; the traitors are agreed;

The King is set from London; and the scene

Is now transported, gentles, to Southampton.

There is the playhouse now, there must you sit;

And thence to France shall we convey you safe,

And bring you back, charming the narrow seas

To give you gentle pass; for, if we may,

We’ll not offend one stomach with our play.

But, till the King come forth, and not till then,

Unto Southampton do we shift our scene.


. London.  street.



Well met, Corporal Nym.


Good morrow, Lieutenant Bardolph.


What, are Ancient Pistol and you friends yet?


For my part,  care not.  say little; but when time shall serve, there

shall be smiles; but that shall be as it may.  dare not fight, but 

will wink and hold out mine iron. It is a simple one, but what though?

It will toast cheese, and it will endure cold as another man’s sword

will; and there’s an end.


will bestow a breakfast to make you friends; and we’ll be all three

sworn brothers to France. Let it be so, good Corporal Nym.


Faith,  will live so long as  may, that’s the certain of it; and when

cannot live any longer,  will do as  may. That is my rest, that is

the rendezvous of it.


It is certain, corporal, that he is married to Nell Quickly; and

certainly she did you wrong, for you were troth-plight to her.


cannot tell. Things must be as they may. Men may sleep, and they may

have their throats about them at that time; and some say knives have

edges. It must be as it may. Though patience be a tired mare, yet she

will plod. There must be conclusions. Well,  cannot tell.



Here comes Ancient Pistol and his wife. Good Corporal, be patient here.

How now, mine host Pistol!


Base tike, call’st thou me host?

Now, by this hand,  swear  scorn the term;

Nor shall my Nell keep lodgers.


No, by my troth, not long; for we cannot lodge and board a dozen o
fourteen gentlewomen that live honestly by the prick of their needles,

but it will be thought we keep a bawdy house straight. [_Nym and Pistol

draw._]  well a day, Lady, if he be not drawn now! We shall see wilful

adultery and murder committed.


Good Lieutenant! good corporal! offer nothing here.


Pish!


Pish for thee, Iceland dog! thou prick-ear’d cur of Iceland!


Good Corporal Nym, show thy valour, and put up your sword.


Will you shog off?  would have you _solus_.


_Solus_, egregious dog!  viper vile!

The _solus_ in thy most mervailous face;

The _solus_ in thy teeth, and in thy throat,

And in thy hateful lungs, yea, in thy maw, perdy,

And, which is worse, within thy nasty mouth!

do retort the _solus_ in thy bowels;

For  can take, and Pistol’s cock is up,

And flashing fire will follow.


am not Barbason; you cannot conjure me.  have an humour to knock you

indifferently well. If you grow foul with me, Pistol,  will scour you

with my rapier, as  may, in fair terms. If you would walk off,  would

prick your guts a little, in good terms, as  may; and that’s the

humour of it.


braggart vile and damned furious wight!

The grave doth gape, and doting death is near,

Therefore exhale.


Hear me, hear me what  say. He that strikes the first stroke ’ll run

him up to the hilts, as  am a soldier.



An oath of mickle might; and fury shall abate.

Give me thy fist, thy fore-foot to me give.

Thy spirits are most tall.


will cut thy throat, one time or other, in fair terms: that is the

humour of it.


“Couple a gorge!”

That is the word.  thee defy again.

hound of Crete, think’st thou my spouse to get?

No! to the spital go,

And from the powdering tub of infamy

Fetch forth the lazar kite of Cressid’s kind,

Doll Tearsheet she by name, and her espouse.

have, and  will hold, the quondam Quickly

For the only she; and _pauca_, there’s enough.

Go to.



Mine host Pistol, you must come to my master, and you, hostess. He is

very sick, and would to bed. Good Bardolph, put thy face between his

sheets, and do the office of a warming-pan. Faith, he’s very ill.


Away, you rogue!


By my troth, he’ll yield the crow a pudding one of these days.

The King has kill’d his heart.

Good husband, come home presently.



Come, shall  make you two friends? We must to France together; why the

devil should we keep knives to cut one another’s throats?


Let floods o’erswell, and fiends for food howl on!


You’ll pay me the eight shillings  won of you at betting?


Base is the slave that pays.


That now  will have: that’s the humour of it.


As manhood shall compound. Push home.



By this sword, he that makes the first thrust, ’ll kill him; by this

sword,  will.


Sword is an oath, and oaths must have their course.


Corporal Nym, and thou wilt be friends, be friends; an thou wilt not,

why, then, be enemies with me too. Prithee, put up.


shall have my eight shillings  won from you at betting?


noble shalt thou have, and present pay;

And liquor likewise will  give to thee,

And friendship shall combine, and brotherhood.

’ll live by Nym, and Nym shall live by me.

Is not this just? For  shall sutler be

Unto the camp, and profits will accrue.

Give me thy hand.


shall have my noble?


In cash most justly paid.


Well, then, that’s the humour of’t.



As ever you come of women, come in quickly to Sir John.

Ah, poor heart! he is so shak’d of a burning quotidian tertian,

that it is most lamentable to behold. Sweet men, come to him.


The King hath run bad humours on the knight; that’s the even of it.


Nym, thou hast spoke the right.

His heart is fracted and corroborate.


The King is a good king; but it must be as it may; he passes some

humours and careers.


Let us condole the knight; for, lambkins, we will live.


Southampton.  council-chamber.



’Fore God, his Grace is bold, to trust these traitors.


They shall be apprehended by and by.


How smooth and even they do bear themselves!

As if allegiance in their bosoms sat

Crowned with faith and constant loyalty.


The King hath note of all that they intend,

By interception which they dream not of.


Nay, but the man that was his bed-fellow,

Whom he hath dull’d and cloy’d with gracious favours,

That he should, for a foreign purse, so sell

His sovereign’s life to death and treachery.



Now sits the wind fair, and we will aboard.

My Lord of Cambridge, and my kind Lord of Masham,

And you, my gentle knight, give me your thoughts.

Think you not that the powers we bear with us

Will cut their passage through the force of France,

Doing the execution and the act

For which we have in head assembled them?


No doubt, my liege, if each man do his best.


doubt not that, since we are well persuaded

We carry not a heart with us from hence

That grows not in a fair consent with ours,

Nor leave not one behind that doth not wish

Success and conquest to attend on us.


Never was monarch better fear’d and lov’d

Than is your Majesty. There’s not,  think, a subject

That sits in heart-grief and uneasiness

Under the sweet shade of your government.


True; those that were your father’s enemies

Have steep’d their galls in honey, and do serve you

With hearts create of duty and of zeal.


We therefore have great cause of thankfulness,

And shall forget the office of our hand

Sooner than quittance of desert and merit

According to the weight and worthiness.


So service shall with steeled sinews toil,

And labour shall refresh itself with hope,

To do your Grace incessant services.


We judge no less. Uncle of Exeter,

Enlarge the man committed yesterday,

That rail’d against our person. We conside
It was excess of wine that set him on,

And on his more advice we pardon him.


That’s mercy, but too much security.

Let him be punish’d, sovereign, lest example

Breed, by his sufferance, more of such a kind.


, let us yet be merciful.


So may your Highness, and yet punish too.


Sir,

You show great mercy if you give him life

After the taste of much correction.


Alas, your too much love and care of me

Are heavy orisons ’gainst this poor wretch!

If little faults, proceeding on distemper,

Shall not be wink’d at, how shall we stretch our eye

When capital crimes, chew’d, swallow’d, and digested,

Appear before us? We’ll yet enlarge that man,

Though Cambridge, Scroop, and Grey, in their dear care

And tender preservation of our person,

Would have him punish’d. And now to our French causes.

Who are the late commissioners?


one, my lord.

Your Highness bade me ask for it today.


So did you me, my liege.


And , my royal sovereign.


Then, Richard Earl of Cambridge, there is yours;

There yours, Lord Scroop of Masham; and, sir knight,

Grey of Northumberland, this same is yours.

Read them, and know  know your worthiness.

My Lord of Westmorland, and uncle Exeter,

We will aboard tonight.—Why, how now, gentlemen!

What see you in those papers that you lose

So much complexion?—Look ye, how they change!

Their cheeks are paper.—Why, what read you there,

That have so cowarded and chas’d your blood

Out of appearance?


do confess my fault,

And do submit me to your Highness’ mercy.

, 

To which we all appeal.


The mercy that was quick in us but late,

By your own counsel is suppress’d and kill’d.

You must not dare, for shame, to talk of mercy,

For your own reasons turn into your bosoms,

As dogs upon their masters, worrying you.

See you, my princes and my noble peers,

These English monsters! My Lord of Cambridge here,

You know how apt our love was to accord

To furnish him with an appertinents

Belonging to his honour; and this man

Hath, for a few light crowns, lightly conspir’d

And sworn unto the practices of France

To kill us here in Hampton; to the which

This knight, no less for bounty bound to us

Than Cambridge is, hath likewise sworn. But, 

What shall  say to thee, Lord Scroop? thou cruel,

Ingrateful, savage, and inhuman creature!

Thou that didst bear the key of all my counsels,

That knew’st the very bottom of my soul,

That almost mightst have coin’d me into gold,

Wouldst thou have practis’d on me for thy use,—

May it be possible that foreign hire

Could out of thee extract one spark of evil

That might annoy my finger? ’Tis so strange,

That, though the truth of it stands off as gross

As black and white, my eye will scarcely see it.

Treason and murder ever kept together,

As two yoke-devils sworn to either’s purpose,

Working so grossly in a natural cause

That admiration did not whoop at them;

But thou, ’gainst all proportion, didst bring in

Wonder to wait on treason and on murder;

And whatsoever cunning fiend it was

That wrought upon thee so preposterously

Hath got the voice in hell for excellence;

And other devils that suggest by treasons

Do botch and bungle up damnation

With patches, colours, and with forms being fetch’d

From glist’ring semblances of piety.

But he that temper’d thee bade thee stand up,

Gave thee no instance why thou shouldst do treason,

Unless to dub thee with the name of traitor.

If that same demon that hath gull’d thee thus

Should with his lion gait walk the whole world,

He might return to vasty Tartar back,

And tell the legions, “ can never win

soul so easy as that Englishman’s.”

, how hast thou with jealousy infected

The sweetness of affiance! Show men dutiful?

Why, so didst thou. Seem they grave and learned?

Why, so didst thou. Come they of noble family?

Why, so didst thou. Seem they religious?

Why, so didst thou. Or are they spare in diet,

Free from gross passion or of mirth or anger,

Constant in spirit, not swerving with the blood,

Garnish’d and deck’d in modest complement,

Not working with the eye without the ear,

And but in purged judgement trusting neither?

Such and so finely bolted didst thou seem.

And thus thy fall hath left a kind of blot

To mark the full-fraught man and best indued

With some suspicion.  will weep for thee;

For this revolt of thine, methinks, is like

Another fall of man. Their faults are open.

Arrest them to the answer of the law;

And God acquit them of their practices!


arrest thee of high treason, by the name of Richard Earl of

Cambridge.

arrest thee of high treason, by the name of Henry Lord Scroop of

Masham.

arrest thee of high treason, by the name of Thomas Grey, knight, of

Northumberland.


Our purposes God justly hath discover’d,

And  repent my fault more than my death,

Which  beseech your Highness to forgive,

Although my body pay the price of it.


For me, the gold of France did not seduce,

Although  did admit it as a motive

The sooner to effect what  intended.

But God be thanked for prevention,

Which  in sufferance heartily will rejoice,

Beseeching God and you to pardon me.


Never did faithful subject more rejoice

At the discovery of most dangerous treason

Than  do at this hour joy o’er myself,

Prevented from a damned enterprise.

My fault, but not my body, pardon, sovereign.


God quit you in his mercy! Hear your sentence.

You have conspir’d against our royal person,

Join’d with an enemy proclaim’d, and from his coffers

Received the golden earnest of our death;

Wherein you would have sold your king to slaughter,

His princes and his peers to servitude,

His subjects to oppression and contempt,

And his whole kingdom into desolation.

Touching our person seek we no revenge;

But we our kingdom’s safety must so tender,

Whose ruin you have sought, that to her laws

We do deliver you. Get you therefore hence,

Poor miserable wretches, to your death,

The taste whereof God of his mercy give

You patience to endure, and true repentance

Of all your dear offences! Bear them hence.


Now, lords, for France; the enterprise whereof

Shall be to you, as us, like glorious.

We doubt not of a fair and lucky war,

Since God so graciously hath brought to light

This dangerous treason lurking in our way

To hinder our beginnings. We doubt not now

But every rub is smoothed on our way.

Then forth, dear countrymen! Let us delive
Our puissance into the hand of God,

Putting it straight in expedition.

Cheerly to sea! The signs of war advance!

No king of England, if not king of France!


London. Before a tavern.



Prithee, honey, sweet husband, let me bring thee to Staines.


No; for my manly heart doth yearn.

Bardolph, be blithe; Nym, rouse thy vaunting veins;

Boy, bristle thy courage up; for Falstaff he is dead,

And we must yearn therefore.


Would  were with him, wheresome’er he is, either in heaven or in hell!


Nay, sure, he’s not in hell. He’s in Arthur’s bosom, if ever man went

to Arthur’s bosom. ’ made a finer end and went away an it had been any

christom child. ’ parted even just between twelve and one, even at the

turning o’ the tide: for after  saw him fumble with the sheets, and

play with flowers, and smile upon his fingers’ ends,  knew there was

but one way; for his nose was as sharp as a pen, and ’a babbled of

green fields. “How now, Sir John!” quoth ; “what, man! be o’ good

cheer.” So ’a cried out, “God, God, God!” three or four times. Now ,

to comfort him, bid him ’a should not think of God;  hop’d there was

no need to trouble himself with any such thoughts yet. So ’a bade me

lay more clothes on his feet.  put my hand into the bed and felt them,

and they were as cold as any stone. Then  felt to his knees, and so

upward and upward, and all was as cold as any stone.


They say he cried out of sack.


Ay, that ’a did.


And of women.


Nay, that ’a did not.


Yes, that ’a did; and said they were devils incarnate.


’ could never abide carnation; ’twas a colour he never liked.


’ said once, the devil would have him about women.


’ did in some sort, indeed, handle women; but then he was rheumatic,

and talk’d of the whore of Babylon.


Do you not remember, ’a saw a flea stick upon Bardolph’s nose, and ’a

said it was a black soul burning in hell-fire?


Well, the fuel is gone that maintain’d that fire. That’s all the riches

got in his service.


Shall we shog? The King will be gone from Southampton.


Come, let’s away. My love, give me thy lips.

Look to my chattels and my movables.

Let senses rule; the word is “Pitch and Pay.”

Trust none;

For oaths are straws, men’s faiths are wafer-cakes

And hold-fast is the only dog, my duck;

Therefore, _Caveto_ be thy counsellor.

Go, clear thy crystals. Yoke-fellows in arms,

Let us to France; like horse-leeches, my boys,

To suck, to suck, the very blood to suck!


And that’s but unwholesome food, they say.


Touch her soft mouth, and march.


Farewell, hostess.



cannot kiss; that is the humour of it; but, adieu.


Let housewifery appear. Keep close,  thee command.


Farewell; adieu.


France. The King’s palace.


Brittany, the Constable and others.


Thus comes the English with full power upon us,

And more than carefully it us concerns

To answer royally in our defences.

Therefore the Dukes of Berry and of Brittany,

Of Brabant and of Orleans, shall make forth,

And you, Prince Dauphin, with all swift dispatch,

To line and new repair our towns of wa
With men of courage and with means defendant;

For England his approaches makes as fierce

As waters to the sucking of a gulf.

It fits us then to be as provident

As fears may teach us out of late examples

Left by the fatal and neglected English

Upon our fields.


My most redoubted father,

It is most meet we arm us ’gainst the foe;

For peace itself should not so dull a kingdom,

Though war nor no known quarrel were in question,

But that defences, musters, preparations,

Should be maintain’d, assembled, and collected,

As were a war in expectation.

Therefore,  say, ’tis meet we all go forth

To view the sick and feeble parts of France.

And let us do it with no show of fear;

No, with no more than if we heard that England

Were busied with a Whitsun morris-dance;

For, my good liege, she is so idly king’d,

Her sceptre so fantastically borne

By a vain, giddy, shallow, humorous youth,

That fear attends her not.


peace, Prince Dauphin!

You are too much mistaken in this king.

Question your Grace the late ambassadors

With what great state he heard their embassy,

How well supplied with noble counsellors,

How modest in exception, and withal

How terrible in constant resolution,

And you shall find his vanities forespent

Were but the outside of the Roman Brutus,

Covering discretion with a coat of folly;

As gardeners do with ordure hide those roots

That shall first spring and be most delicate.


Well, ’tis not so, my Lord High Constable;

But though we think it so, it is no matter.

In cases of defence ’tis best to weigh

The enemy more mighty than he seems,

So the proportions of defence are fill’d;

Which, of a weak and niggardly projection,

Doth, like a miser, spoil his coat with scanting

little cloth.


Think we King Harry strong;

And, Princes, look you strongly arm to meet him.

The kindred of him hath been flesh’d upon us;

And he is bred out of that bloody strain

That haunted us in our familiar paths.

Witness our too much memorable shame

When Cressy battle fatally was struck,

And all our princes captiv’d by the hand

Of that black name, Edward, Black Prince of Wales;

Whiles that his mountain sire, on mountain standing,

Up in the air, crown’d with the golden sun,

Saw his heroical seed, and smil’d to see him,

Mangle the work of nature and deface

The patterns that by God and by French fathers

Had twenty years been made. This is a stem

Of that victorious stock; and let us fea
The native mightiness and fate of him.



Ambassadors from Harry King of England

Do crave admittance to your Majesty.


We’ll give them present audience. Go, and bring them.


You see this chase is hotly follow’d, friends.


Turn head and stop pursuit; for coward dogs

Most spend their mouths when what they seem to threaten

Runs far before them. Good my sovereign,

Take up the English short, and let them know

Of what a monarchy you are the head.

Self-love, my liege, is not so vile a sin

As self-neglecting.



From our brother of England?


From him; and thus he greets your Majesty:

He wills you, in the name of God Almighty,

That you divest yourself, and lay apart

The borrowed glories that by gift of heaven,

By law of nature and of nations, ’longs

To him and to his heirs; namely, the crown

And all wide-stretched honours that pertain

By custom and the ordinance of times

Unto the crown of France. That you may know

’Tis no sinister nor no awkward claim

Pick’d from the worm-holes of long-vanish’d days,

Nor from the dust of old oblivion rak’d,

He sends you this most memorable line,

In every branch truly demonstrative;

Willing you overlook this pedigree;

And when you find him evenly deriv’d

From his most fam’d of famous ancestors,

Edward the Third, he bids you then resign

Your crown and kingdom, indirectly held

From him, the native and true challenger.


Or else what follows?


Bloody constraint; for if you hide the crown

Even in your hearts, there will he rake for it.

Therefore in fierce tempest is he coming,

In thunder and in earthquake, like a Jove,

That, if requiring fail, he will compel;

And bids you, in the bowels of the Lord,

Deliver up the crown, and to take mercy

On the poor souls for whom this hungry wa
Opens his vasty jaws; and on your head

Turning the widows’ tears, the orphans’ cries,

The dead men’s blood, the pining maidens’ groans,

For husbands, fathers, and betrothed lovers,

That shall be swallowed in this controversy.

This is his claim, his threat’ning, and my message;

Unless the Dauphin be in presence here,

To whom expressly  bring greeting too.


For us, we will consider of this further.

Tomorrow shall you bear our full intent

Back to our brother of England.


For the Dauphin,

stand here for him. What to him from England?


Scorn and defiance. Slight regard, contempt,

And anything that may not misbecome

The mighty sender, doth he prize you at.

Thus says my king: an if your father’s Highness

Do not, in grant of all demands at large,

Sweeten the bitter mock you sent his Majesty,

He’ll call you to so hot an answer of it

That caves and womby vaultages of France

Shall chide your trespass and return your mock

In second accent of his ordinance.


Say, if my father render fair return,

It is against my will; for  desire

Nothing but odds with England. To that end,

As matching to his youth and vanity,

did present him with the Paris balls.


He’ll make your Paris Louvre shake for it,

Were it the mistress-court of mighty Europe;

And, be assur’d, you’ll find a difference,

As we his subjects have in wonder found,

Between the promise of his greener days

And these he masters now. Now he weighs time

Even to the utmost grain. That you shall read

In your own losses, if he stay in France.


Tomorrow shall you know our mind at full.



Dispatch us with all speed, lest that our king

Come here himself to question our delay;

For he is footed in this land already.


You shall be soon dispatch’d with fair conditions.

night is but small breath and little pause

To answer matters of this consequence.





Thus with imagin’d wing our swift scene flies,

In motion of no less celerity

Than that of thought. Suppose that you have seen

The well-appointed king at Hampton pie
Embark his royalty, and his brave fleet

With silken streamers the young Phoebus fanning.

Play with your fancies; and in them behold

Upon the hempen tackle ship-boys climbing;

Hear the shrill whistle which doth order give

To sounds confus’d; behold the threaden sails,

Borne with the invisible and creeping wind,

Draw the huge bottoms through the furrow’d sea,

Breasting the lofty surge. , do but think

You stand upon the rivage and behold

city on the inconstant billows dancing;

For so appears this fleet majestical,

Holding due course to Harfleur. Follow, follow!

Grapple your minds to sternage of this navy,

And leave your England, as dead midnight still,

Guarded with grandsires, babies, and old women,

Either past or not arriv’d to pith and puissance.

For who is he, whose chin is but enrich’d

With one appearing hair, that will not follow

These cull’d and choice-drawn cavaliers to France?

Work, work your thoughts, and therein see a siege;

Behold the ordnance on their carriages,

With fatal mouths gaping on girded Harfleur.

Suppose the ambassador from the French comes back,

Tells Harry that the King doth offer him

Katharine his daughter, and with her, to dowry,

Some petty and unprofitable dukedoms.

The offer likes not; and the nimble gunne
With linstock now the devilish cannon touches,


And down goes all before them. Still be kind,

And eke out our performance with your mind.


. France. Before Harfleur.


with scaling-ladders.


Once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more,

Or close the wall up with our English dead.

In peace there’s nothing so becomes a man

As modest stillness and humility;

But when the blast of war blows in our ears,

Then imitate the action of the tiger;

Stiffen the sinews, summon up the blood,

Disguise fair nature with hard-favour’d rage;

Then lend the eye a terrible aspect;

Let it pry through the portage of the head

Like the brass cannon; let the brow o’erwhelm it

As fearfully as does a galled rock

’erhang and jutty his confounded base,

Swill’d with the wild and wasteful ocean.

Now set the teeth and stretch the nostril wide,

Hold hard the breath, and bend up every spirit

To his full height. On, on, you noblest English,

Whose blood is fet from fathers of war-proof!

Fathers that, like so many Alexanders,

Have in these parts from morn till even fought,

And sheath’d their swords for lack of argument.

Dishonour not your mothers; now attest

That those whom you call’d fathers did beget you.

Be copy now to men of grosser blood,

And teach them how to war. And you, good yeomen,

Whose limbs were made in England, show us here

The mettle of your pasture; let us swea
That you are worth your breeding, which  doubt not;

For there is none of you so mean and base,

That hath not noble lustre in your eyes.

see you stand like greyhounds in the slips,

Straining upon the start. The game’s afoot!

Follow your spirit, and upon this charge

Cry, “God for Harry! England and Saint George!”


The same.



On, on, on, on, on! To the breach, to the breach!


Pray thee, corporal, stay. The knocks are too hot; and, for mine own

part,  have not a case of lives. The humour of it is too hot; that is

the very plain-song of it.


The plain-song is most just, for humours do abound.

Knocks go and come; God’s vassals drop and die;

And sword and shield,

In bloody field,

Doth win immortal fame.


Would  were in an alehouse in London!  would give all my fame for a

pot of ale and safety.


And .

If wishes would prevail with me,

My purpose should not fail with me,

But thither would  hie.


As duly,

But not as truly,

As bird doth sing on bough.



Up to the breach, you dogs! Avaunt, you cullions!



Be merciful, great Duke, to men of mould.

Abate thy rage, abate thy manly rage,

Abate thy rage, great Duke!

Good bawcock, bate thy rage; use lenity, sweet chuck!


These be good humours! Your honour wins bad humours.



As young as  am,  have observ’d these three swashers.  am boy to

them all three; but all they three, though they would serve me, could

not be man to me; for indeed three such antics do not amount to a man.

For Bardolph, he is white-liver’d and red-fac’d; by the means whereof

’a faces it out, but fights not. For Pistol, he hath a killing tongue

and a quiet sword; by the means whereof ’a breaks words, and keeps

whole weapons. For Nym, he hath heard that men of few words are the

best men; and therefore he scorns to say his prayers, lest ’a should be

thought a coward. But his few bad words are match’d with as few good

deeds; for ’a never broke any man’s head but his own, and that was

against a post when he was drunk. They will steal anything, and call it

purchase. Bardolph stole a lute-case, bore it twelve leagues, and sold

it for three half-pence. Nym and Bardolph are sworn brothers in

filching, and in Calais they stole a fire-shovel.  knew by that piece

of service the men would carry coals. They would have me as familia
with men’s pockets as their gloves or their handkerchers; which makes

much against my manhood, if  should take from another’s pocket to put

into mine; for it is plain pocketing up of wrongs.  must leave them,

and seek some better service. Their villainy goes against my weak

stomach, and therefore  must cast it up.




Captain Fluellen, you must come presently to the mines.

The Duke of Gloucester would speak with you.


To the mines! Tell you the Duke, it is not so good to come to the

mines; for, look you, the mines is not according to the disciplines of

the war. The concavities of it is not sufficient; for, look you, the

athversary, you may discuss unto the Duke, look you, is digt himself

four yard under the countermines. By Cheshu,  think ’a will plow up

all, if there is not better directions.


The Duke of Gloucester, to whom the order of the siege is given, is

altogether directed by an Irishman, a very valiant gentleman, i’ faith.


It is Captain Macmorris, is it not?


think it be.


By Cheshu, he is an ass, as in the world.  will verify as much in his

beard. He has no more directions in the true disciplines of the wars,

look you, of the Roman disciplines, than is a puppy-dog.



Here ’a comes; and the Scots captain, Captain Jamy, with him.


Captain Jamy is a marvellous falorous gentleman, that is certain; and

of great expedition and knowledge in the anchient wars, upon my

particular knowledge of his directions. By Cheshu, he will maintain his

argument as well as any military man in the world, in the disciplines

of the pristine wars of the Romans.


say gud-day, Captain Fluellen.


God-den to your worship, good Captain James.


How now, Captain Macmorris! have you quit the mines?

Have the pioneers given o’er?


By Chrish, la! ’tish ill done! The work ish give over, the trompet

sound the retreat. By my hand  swear, and my father’s soul, the work

ish ill done; it ish give over.  would have blowed up the town, so

Chrish save me, la! in an hour. , ’tish ill done, ’tish ill done; by

my hand, ’tish ill done!


Captain Macmorris,  beseech you now, will you voutsafe me, look you, a

few disputations with you, as partly touching or concerning the

disciplines of the war, the Roman wars, in the way of argument, look

you, and friendly communication; partly to satisfy my opinion, and

partly for the satisfaction, look you, of my mind, as touching the

direction of the military discipline; that is the point.


It sall be vary gud, gud feith, gud captains bath: and  sall quit you

with gud leve, as  may pick occasion; that sall , marry.


It is no time to discourse, so Chrish save me. The day is hot, and the

weather, and the wars, and the King, and the Dukes. It is no time to

discourse. The town is beseech’d, and the trumpet call us to the

breach, and we talk, and, be Chrish, do nothing. ’Tis shame for us all.

So God sa’ me, ’tis shame to stand still; it is shame, by my hand; and

there is throats to be cut, and works to be done; and there ish nothing

done, so Chrish sa’ me, la!


By the mess, ere theise eyes of mine take themselves to slomber, ’ll

de gud service, or ’ll lig i’ the grund for it; ay, or go to death;

and ’ll pay’t as valorously as  may, that sall  suerly do, that is

the breff and the long. Marry,  wad full fain heard some question

’tween you tway.


Captain Macmorris,  think, look you, under your correction, there is

not many of your nation—


Of my nation! What ish my nation? Ish a villain, and a bastard, and a

knave, and a rascal? What ish my nation? Who talks of my nation?


Look you, if you take the matter otherwise than is meant, Captain

Macmorris, peradventure  shall think you do not use me with that

affability as in discretion you ought to use me, look you, being as

good a man as yourself, both in the disciplines of war, and in the

derivation of my birth, and in other particularities.


do not know you so good a man as myself. So Chrish save me,

will cut off your head.


Gentlemen both, you will mistake each other.


Ah! that’s a foul fault.



The town sounds a parley.


Captain Macmorris, when there is more better opportunity to be

required, look you,  will be so bold as to tell you  know the

disciplines of war; and there is an end.


Before the gates.

The Governor and some citizens on the walls; the English forces below.



How yet resolves the governor of the town?

This is the latest parle we will admit;

Therefore to our best mercy give yourselves,

Or like to men proud of destruction

Defy us to our worst; for, as  am a soldier,

name that in my thoughts becomes me best,

If  begin the battery once again,

will not leave the half-achieved Harfleu
Till in her ashes she lie buried.

The gates of mercy shall be all shut up,

And the flesh’d soldier, rough and hard of heart,

In liberty of bloody hand shall range

With conscience wide as hell, mowing like grass

Your fresh fair virgins and your flow’ring infants.

What is it then to me, if impious War,

Array’d in flames like to the prince of fiends,

Do with his smirch’d complexion all fell feats

Enlink’d to waste and desolation?

What is’t to me, when you yourselves are cause,

If your pure maidens fall into the hand

Of hot and forcing violation?

What rein can hold licentious wickedness

When down the hill he holds his fierce career?

We may as bootless spend our vain command

Upon the enraged soldiers in their spoil

As send precepts to the leviathan

To come ashore. Therefore, you men of Harfleur,

Take pity of your town and of your people,

Whiles yet my soldiers are in my command,

Whiles yet the cool and temperate wind of grace

’erblows the filthy and contagious clouds

Of heady murder, spoil, and villainy.

If not, why, in a moment look to see

The blind and bloody soldier with foul hand

Defile the locks of your shrill-shrieking daughters;

Your fathers taken by the silver beards,

And their most reverend heads dash’d to the walls;

Your naked infants spitted upon pikes,

Whiles the mad mothers with their howls confus’d

Do break the clouds, as did the wives of Jewry

At Herod’s bloody-hunting slaughtermen.

What say you? Will you yield, and this avoid,

Or, guilty in defence, be thus destroy’d?


Our expectation hath this day an end.

The Dauphin, whom of succours we entreated,

Returns us that his powers are yet not ready

To raise so great a siege. Therefore, great King,

We yield our town and lives to thy soft mercy.


For we no longer are defensible.


Open your gates. Come, uncle Exeter,

Go you and enter Harfleur; there remain,

And fortify it strongly ’gainst the French.

Use mercy to them all. For us, dear uncle,

The winter coming on, and sickness growing

Upon our soldiers, we will retire to Calais.

Tonight in Harfleur will we be your guest;

Tomorrow for the march are we addrest.

Flourish. The King and his train enter the town.

The French King’s palace.



_Alice, tu as été en Angleterre, et tu parles bien le langage._


_Un peu, madame._


_Je te prie, m’enseignez; il faut que j’apprenne à parler.

Comment appelez-vous la main en anglais?_


_La main? Elle est appelée_ de hand.


De hand. _Et les doigts?_


_Les doigts? Ma foi, j’oublie les doigts; mais je me souviendrai. Les

doigts? Je pense qu’ils sont appelés_ de fingres; _oui_, de fingres.


_La main_, de hand; _les doigts_, de fingres. _Je pense que je suis le

bon écolier; j’ai gagné deux mots d’anglais vitement. Comment

appelez-vous les ongles?_


_Les ongles? Nous les appelons_ de nails.


De nails. _Écoutez; dites-moi, si je parle bien:_ de hand, de fingres,

_et_ de nails.


_C’est bien dit, madame; il est fort bon anglais._


_Dites-moi l’anglais pour le bras._


De arm, _madame._


_Et le coude?_


’elbow.


’elbow. _Je m’en fais la répétition de tous les mots que vous m’avez

appris dès à présent._


_Il est trop difficile, madame, comme je pense._


_Excusez-moi, Alice. Écoutez:_ d’hand, de fingres, de nails, d’arm, de

bilbow.


’elbow, _madame._


_O Seigneur Dieu, je m’en oublie!_ ’elbow.

_Comment appelez-vous le col?_


De nick, _madame._


De nick. _Et le menton?_


De chin.


De sin. _Le col_, de nick; _le menton_, de sin.


_Oui. Sauf votre honneur, en vérité, vous prononcez les mots aussi

droit que les natifs d’Angleterre._


_Je ne doute point d’apprendre, par la grâce de Dieu, et en peu de

temps._


_N’avez-vous pas déjà oublié ce que je vous ai enseigné?_


_Non, je réciterai à vous promptement:_ d’hand, de fingres, de mails,—


De nails, _madame._


De nails, de arm, de ilbow.


_Sauf votre honneur_, de elbow.


_Ainsi dis-je_, d’elbow, de nick, _et_ de sin. _Comment appelez-vous le

pied et la robe?_


De foot, _madame; et_ de coun.


De foot _et_ de coun! _O Seigneur Dieu! ils sont les mots de son

mauvais, corruptible, gros, et impudique, et non pour les dames

d’honneur d’user. Je ne voudrais prononcer ces mots devant les

seigneurs de France pour tout le monde. Foh!_ le foot _et_ le coun!

_Néanmoins, je réciterai une autre fois ma leçon ensemble:_ d’hand, de

fingres, de nails, d’arm, d’elbow, de nick, de sin, de foot, de coun.


_Excellent, madame!_


_C’est assez pour une fois. Allons-nous à dîner._


. The same.


Constable of France and others.


’Tis certain he hath pass’d the river Somme.


And if he be not fought withal, my lord,

Let us not live in France; let us quit all

And give our vineyards to a barbarous people.


_O Dieu vivant_! shall a few sprays of us,

The emptying of our fathers’ luxury,

Our scions put in wild and savage stock,

Spirt up so suddenly into the clouds,

And overlook their grafters?


Normans, but bastard Normans, Norman bastards!

_Mort de ma vie_, if they march along

Unfought withal, but  will sell my dukedom,

To buy a slobbery and a dirty farm

In that nook-shotten isle of Albion.


_Dieu de batailles_, where have they this mettle?

Is not their climate foggy, raw, and dull,

On whom, as in despite, the sun looks pale,

Killing their fruit with frowns? Can sodden water,

drench for sur-rein’d jades, their barley-broth,

Decoct their cold blood to such valiant heat?

And shall our quick blood, spirited with wine,

Seem frosty? , for honour of our land,

Let us not hang like roping icicles

Upon our houses’ thatch, whiles a more frosty people

Sweat drops of gallant youth in our rich fields!

Poor we may call them in their native lords.


By faith and honour,

Our madams mock at us, and plainly say

Our mettle is bred out, and they will give

Their bodies to the lust of English youth

To new-store France with bastard warriors.


They bid us to the English dancing-schools,

And teach lavoltas high, and swift corantos;

Saying our grace is only in our heels,

And that we are most lofty runaways.


Where is Montjoy the herald? Speed him hence.

Let him greet England with our sharp defiance.

Up, princes! and, with spirit of honour edged

More sharper than your swords, hie to the field!

Charles Delabreth, High Constable of France;

You Dukes of Orleans, Bourbon, and of Berry,

Alençon, Brabant, Bar, and Burgundy;

Jacques Chatillon, Rambures, Vaudemont,

Beaumont, Grandpré, Roussi, and Fauconbridge,

Foix, Lestrale, Boucicault, and Charolois;

High dukes, great princes, barons, lords, and knights,

For your great seats now quit you of great shames.

Bar Harry England, that sweeps through our land

With pennons painted in the blood of Harfleur.

Rush on his host, as doth the melted snow

Upon the valleys, whose low vassal seat

The Alps doth spit and void his rheum upon.

Go down upon him, you have power enough,

And in a captive chariot into Rouen

Bring him our prisoner.


This becomes the great.

Sorry am  his numbers are so few,

His soldiers sick and famish’d in their march;

For  am sure, when he shall see our army,

He’ll drop his heart into the sink of fea
And for achievement offer us his ransom.


Therefore, Lord Constable, haste on Montjoy,

And let him say to England that we send

To know what willing ransom he will give.

Prince Dauphin, you shall stay with us in Rouen.


Not so,  do beseech your Majesty.


Be patient, for you shall remain with us.

Now forth, Lord Constable and princes all,

And quickly bring us word of England’s fall.


The English camp in Picardy.



How now, Captain Fluellen! come you from the bridge?


assure you, there is very excellent services committed at the bridge.


Is the Duke of Exeter safe?


The Duke of Exeter is as magnanimous as Agamemnon; and a man that 

love and honour with my soul, and my heart, and my duty, and my life,

and my living, and my uttermost power. He is not—God be praised and

blessed!—any hurt in the world; but keeps the bridge most valiantly,

with excellent discipline. There is an anchient lieutenant there at the

pridge,  think in my very conscience he is as valiant a man as Mark

Antony; and he is a man of no estimation in the world, but  did see

him do as gallant service.


What do you call him?


He is call’d Anchient Pistol.


know him not.



Here is the man.


Captain,  thee beseech to do me favours.

The Duke of Exeter doth love thee well.


Ay,  praise God; and  have merited some love at his hands.


Bardolph, a soldier, firm and sound of heart,

And of buxom valour, hath by cruel fate

And giddy Fortune’s furious fickle wheel,

That goddess blind,

That stands upon the rolling restless stone—


By your patience, Anchient Pistol. Fortune is painted blind, with a

muffler afore his eyes, to signify to you that Fortune is blind; and

she is painted also with a wheel, to signify to you, which is the moral

of it, that she is turning, and inconstant, and mutability, and

variation; and her foot, look you, is fixed upon a spherical stone,

which rolls, and rolls, and rolls. In good truth, the poet makes a most

excellent description of it. Fortune is an excellent moral.


Fortune is Bardolph’s foe, and frowns on him;

For he hath stolen a pax, and hanged must ’a be,—

damned death!

Let gallows gape for dog; let man go free,

And let not hemp his windpipe suffocate.

But Exeter hath given the doom of death

For pax of little price.

Therefore, go speak; the Duke will hear thy voice;

And let not Bardolph’s vital thread be cut

With edge of penny cord and vile reproach.

Speak, captain, for his life, and  will thee requite.


Anchient Pistol,  do partly understand your meaning.


Why then, rejoice therefore.


Certainly, anchient, it is not a thing to rejoice at; for if, look you,

he were my brother,  would desire the Duke to use his good pleasure,

and put him to execution; for discipline ought to be used.


Die and be damn’d! and _fico_ for thy friendship!


It is well.


The fig of Spain.



Very good.


Why, this is an arrant counterfeit rascal.  remember him now; a bawd,

a cutpurse.


’ll assure you, ’a uttered as prave words at the pridge as you shall

see in a summer’s day. But it is very well; what he has spoke to me,

that is well,  warrant you, when time is serve.


Why, ’t is a gull, a fool, a rogue, that now and then goes to the wars,

to grace himself at his return into London under the form of a soldier.

And such fellows are perfect in the great commanders’ names; and they

will learn you by rote where services were done; at such and such a

sconce, at such a breach, at such a convoy; who came off bravely, who

was shot, who disgrac’d, what terms the enemy stood on; and this they

con perfectly in the phrase of war, which they trick up with new-tuned

oaths: and what a beard of the general’s cut and a horrid suit of the

camp will do among foaming bottles and ale-wash’d wits, is wonderful to

be thought on. But you must learn to know such slanders of the age, o
else you may be marvellously mistook.


tell you what, Captain Gower;  do perceive he is not the man that he

would gladly make show to the world he is. If  find a hole in his

coat,  will tell him my mind.  Hark you, the King is

coming, and  must speak with him from the pridge.


God bless your Majesty!


How now, Fluellen! cam’st thou from the bridge?


Ay, so please your Majesty. The Duke of Exeter has very gallantly

maintain’d the pridge. The French is gone off, look you; and there is

gallant and most prave passages. Marry, th’ athversary was have

possession of the pridge; but he is enforced to retire, and the Duke of

Exeter is master of the pridge.  can tell your Majesty, the Duke is a

prave man.


What men have you lost, Fluellen?


The perdition of the athversary hath been very great, reasonable great.

Marry, for my part,  think the Duke hath lost never a man, but one

that is like to be executed for robbing a church, one Bardolph, if you
Majesty know the man. His face is all bubukles, and whelks, and knobs,

and flames o’ fire; and his lips blows at his nose, and it is like a

coal of fire, sometimes plue and sometimes red; but his nose is

executed, and his fire’s out.


We would have all such offenders so cut off; and we give express

charge, that in our marches through the country, there be nothing

compell’d from the villages, nothing taken but paid for, none of the

French upbraided or abused in disdainful language; for when lenity and

cruelty play for a kingdom, the gentler gamester is the soonest winner.



You know me by my habit.


Well then  know thee. What shall  know of thee?


My master’s mind.


Unfold it.


Thus says my King: Say thou to Harry of England: Though we seem’d dead,

we did but sleep; advantage is a better soldier than rashness. Tell him

we could have rebuk’d him at Harfleur, but that we thought not good to

bruise an injury till it were full ripe. Now we speak upon our cue, and

our voice is imperial. England shall repent his folly, see his

weakness, and admire our sufferance. Bid him therefore consider of his

ransom; which must proportion the losses we have borne, the subjects we

have lost, the disgrace we have digested; which in weight to re-answer,

his pettishness would bow under. For our losses, his exchequer is too

poor; for the effusion of our blood, the muster of his kingdom too

faint a number; and for our disgrace, his own person, kneeling at ou
feet, but a weak and worthless satisfaction. To this add defiance; and

tell him, for conclusion, he hath betrayed his followers, whose

condemnation is pronounc’d. So far my King and master; so much my

office.


What is thy name?  know thy quality.


Montjoy.


Thou dost thy office fairly. Turn thee back,

And tell thy King  do not seek him now,

But could be willing to march on to Calais

Without impeachment; for, to say the sooth,

Though ’tis no wisdom to confess so much

Unto an enemy of craft and vantage,

My people are with sickness much enfeebled,

My numbers lessen’d, and those few  have

Almost no better than so many French;

Who when they were in health,  tell thee, herald,

thought upon one pair of English legs

Did march three Frenchmen. Yet, forgive me, God,

That  do brag thus! This your air of France

Hath blown that vice in me.  must repent.

Go therefore, tell thy master here  am;

My ransom is this frail and worthless trunk,

My army but a weak and sickly guard;

Yet, God before, tell him we will come on,

Though France himself and such another neighbou
Stand in our way. There’s for thy labour, Montjoy.

Go, bid thy master well advise himself.

If we may pass, we will; if we be hind’red,

We shall your tawny ground with your red blood

Discolour; and so, Montjoy, fare you well.

The sum of all our answer is but this:

We would not seek a battle, as we are;

Nor, as we are, we say we will not shun it.

So tell your master.


shall deliver so. Thanks to your Highness.



hope they will not come upon us now.


We are in God’s hands, brother, not in theirs.

March to the bridge; it now draws toward night.

Beyond the river we’ll encamp ourselves,

And on tomorrow bid them march away.


The French camp, near Agincourt.


with others.


Tut!  have the best armour of the world.

Would it were day!


You have an excellent armour; but let my horse have his due.


It is the best horse of Europe.


Will it never be morning?


My Lord of Orleans, and my Lord High Constable, you talk of horse and

armour?


You are as well provided of both as any prince in the world.


What a long night is this!  will not change my horse with any that

treads but on four pasterns. Ch’ha! He bounds from the earth, as if his

entrails were hairs; _le cheval volant_, the Pegasus, _qui a les

narines de feu!_ When  bestride him,  soar,  am a hawk. He trots the

air; the earth sings when he touches it; the basest horn of his hoof is

more musical than the pipe of Hermes.


He’s of the colour of the nutmeg.


And of the heat of the ginger. It is a beast for Perseus. He is pure

air and fire; and the dull elements of earth and water never appear in

him, but only in patient stillness while his rider mounts him. He is

indeed a horse, and all other jades you may call beasts.


Indeed, my lord, it is a most absolute and excellent horse.


It is the prince of palfreys; his neigh is like the bidding of a

monarch, and his countenance enforces homage.


No more, cousin.


Nay, the man hath no wit that cannot, from the rising of the lark to

the lodging of the lamb, vary deserved praise on my palfrey. It is a

theme as fluent as the sea; turn the sands into eloquent tongues, and

my horse is argument for them all. ’Tis a subject for a sovereign to

reason on, and for a sovereign’s sovereign to ride on; and for the

world, familiar to us and unknown, to lay apart their particula
functions and wonder at him.  once writ a sonnet in his praise and

began thus: “Wonder of nature,”—


have heard a sonnet begin so to one’s mistress.


Then did they imitate that which  compos’d to my courser, for my horse

is my mistress.


Your mistress bears well.


Me well; which is the prescript praise and perfection of a good and

particular mistress.


Nay, for methought yesterday your mistress shrewdly shook your back.


So perhaps did yours.


Mine was not bridled.


then belike she was old and gentle; and you rode, like a kern of

Ireland, your French hose off, and in your strait strossers.


You have good judgment in horsemanship.


Be warn’d by me, then; they that ride so and ride not warily, fall into

foul bogs.  had rather have my horse to my mistress.


had as lief have my mistress a jade.


tell thee, Constable, my mistress wears his own hair.


could make as true a boast as that, if  had a sow to my mistress.


“_Le chien est retourné à son propre vomissement, et la truie lavée au

bourbier_.” Thou mak’st use of anything.


Yet do  not use my horse for my mistress, or any such proverb so

little kin to the purpose.


My Lord Constable, the armour that  saw in your tent tonight, are

those stars or suns upon it?


Stars, my lord.


Some of them will fall tomorrow,  hope.


And yet my sky shall not want.


That may be, for you bear a many superfluously, and ’twere more honou
some were away.


Even as your horse bears your praises; who would trot as well, were

some of your brags dismounted.


Would  were able to load him with his desert! Will it never be day? 

will trot tomorrow a mile, and my way shall be paved with English

faces.


will not say so, for fear  should be fac’d out of my way. But 

would it were morning; for  would fain be about the ears of the

English.


Who will go to hazard with me for twenty prisoners?


You must first go yourself to hazard, ere you have them.


’Tis midnight; ’ll go arm myself.



The Dauphin longs for morning.


He longs to eat the English.


think he will eat all he kills.


By the white hand of my lady, he’s a gallant prince.


Swear by her foot that she may tread out the oath.


He is simply the most active gentleman of France.


Doing is activity; and he will still be doing.


He never did harm, that  heard of.


Nor will do none tomorrow. He will keep that good name still.


know him to be valiant.


was told that by one that knows him better than you.


What’s he?


Marry, he told me so himself; and he said he car’d not who knew it.


He needs not; it is no hidden virtue in him.


By my faith, sir, but it is; never anybody saw it but his lackey. ’Tis

a hooded valour; and when it appears, it will bate.


“Ill will never said well.”


will cap that proverb with “There is flattery in friendship.”


And  will take up that with “Give the devil his due.”


Well plac’d. There stands your friend for the devil; have at the very

eye of that proverb with “ pox of the devil.”


You are the better at proverbs, by how much “ fool’s bolt is soon

shot.”


You have shot over.


’Tis not the first time you were overshot.



My Lord High Constable, the English lie within fifteen hundred paces of

your tents.


Who hath measur’d the ground?


The Lord Grandpré.


valiant and most expert gentleman. Would it were day! Alas, poo
Harry of England, he longs not for the dawning as we do.


What a wretched and peevish fellow is this King of England, to mope

with his fat-brain’d followers so far out of his knowledge!


If the English had any apprehension, they would run away.


That they lack; for if their heads had any intellectual armour, they

could never wear such heavy head-pieces.


That island of England breeds very valiant creatures. Their mastiffs

are of unmatchable courage.


Foolish curs, that run winking into the mouth of a Russian bear and

have their heads crush’d like rotten apples! You may as well say,

that’s a valiant flea that dare eat his breakfast on the lip of a lion.


Just, just; and the men do sympathize with the mastiffs in robustious

and rough coming on, leaving their wits with their wives; and then,

give them great meals of beef and iron and steel, they will eat like

wolves and fight like devils.


Ay, but these English are shrewdly out of beef.


Then shall we find tomorrow they have only stomachs to eat and none to

fight. Now is it time to arm. Come, shall we about it?


It is now two o’clock; but, let me see, by ten

We shall have each a hundred Englishmen.





Now entertain conjecture of a time

When creeping murmur and the poring dark

Fills the wide vessel of the universe.

From camp to camp through the foul womb of night

The hum of either army stilly sounds,

That the fix’d sentinels almost receive

The secret whispers of each other’s watch;

Fire answers fire, and through their paly flames

Each battle sees the other’s umber’d face;

Steed threatens steed, in high and boastful neighs

Piercing the night’s dull ear; and from the tents

The armourers, accomplishing the knights,

With busy hammers closing rivets up,

Give dreadful note of preparation.

The country cocks do crow, the clocks do toll,

And the third hour of drowsy morning name.

Proud of their numbers and secure in soul,

The confident and over-lusty French

Do the low-rated English play at dice;

And chide the cripple tardy-gaited Night

Who, like a foul and ugly witch, doth limp

So tediously away. The poor condemned English,

Like sacrifices, by their watchful fires

Sit patiently and inly ruminate

The morning’s danger; and their gesture sad,

Investing lank-lean cheeks and war-worn coats,

Presented them unto the gazing moon

So many horrid ghosts.  now, who will behold

The royal captain of this ruin’d band

Walking from watch to watch, from tent to tent,

Let him cry, “Praise and glory on his head!”

For forth he goes and visits all his host,

Bids them good morrow with a modest smile,

And calls them brothers, friends, and countrymen.

Upon his royal face there is no note

How dread an army hath enrounded him;

Nor doth he dedicate one jot of colou
Unto the weary and all-watched night,

But freshly looks, and over-bears attaint

With cheerful semblance and sweet majesty;

That every wretch, pining and pale before,

Beholding him, plucks comfort from his looks.

largess universal like the sun

His liberal eye doth give to everyone,

Thawing cold fear, that mean and gentle all

Behold, as may unworthiness define,

little touch of Harry in the night.

And so our scene must to the battle fly,

Where— for pity!—we shall much disgrace

With four or five most vile and ragged foils,

Right ill-dispos’d in brawl ridiculous,

The name of Agincourt. Yet sit and see,

Minding true things by what their mock’ries be.


. The English camp at Agincourt.



Gloucester, ’tis true that we are in great danger;

The greater therefore should our courage be.

Good morrow, brother Bedford. God Almighty!

There is some soul of goodness in things evil,

Would men observingly distil it out;

For our bad neighbour makes us early stirrers,

Which is both healthful and good husbandry.

Besides, they are our outward consciences,

And preachers to us all, admonishing

That we should dress us fairly for our end.

Thus may we gather honey from the weed,

And make a moral of the devil himself.


Good morrow, old Sir Thomas Erpingham:

good soft pillow for that good white head

Were better than a churlish turf of France.


Not so, my liege; this lodging likes me better,

Since  may say, “Now lie  like a king.”


’Tis good for men to love their present pains

Upon example; so the spirit is eased;

And when the mind is quick’ned, out of doubt,

The organs, though defunct and dead before,

Break up their drowsy grave and newly move,

With casted slough and fresh legerity.

Lend me thy cloak, Sir Thomas. Brothers both,

Commend me to the princes in our camp;

Do my good morrow to them, and anon

Desire them all to my pavilion.


We shall, my liege.


Shall  attend your Grace?


No, my good knight;

Go with my brothers to my lords of England.

and my bosom must debate a while,

And then  would no other company.


The Lord in heaven bless thee, noble Harry!



God-a-mercy, old heart! thou speak’st cheerfully.



_Qui vous là?_


friend.


Discuss unto me; art thou officer?

Or art thou base, common, and popular?


am a gentleman of a company.


Trail’st thou the puissant pike?


Even so. What are you?


As good a gentleman as the Emperor.


Then you are a better than the King.


The King’s a bawcock, and a heart of gold,

lad of life, an imp of fame;

Of parents good, of fist most valiant.

kiss his dirty shoe, and from heart-string

love the lovely bully. What is thy name?


Harry le Roy.


Le Roy! a Cornish name. Art thou of Cornish crew?


No,  am a Welshman.


Know’st thou Fluellen?


Yes.


Tell him ’ll knock his leek about his pate

Upon Saint Davy’s day.


Do not you wear your dagger in your cap that day, lest he knock that

about yours.


Art thou his friend?


And his kinsman too.


The _fico_ for thee, then!


thank you. God be with you!


My name is Pistol call’d.



It sorts well with your fierceness.



Captain Fluellen!


So! in the name of Jesu Christ, speak lower. It is the greatest

admiration in the universal world, when the true and anchient

prerogatifes and laws of the wars is not kept. If you would take the

pains but to examine the wars of Pompey the Great, you shall find, 

warrant you, that there is no tiddle taddle nor pibble pabble in

Pompey’s camp.  warrant you, you shall find the ceremonies of the

wars, and the cares of it, and the forms of it, and the sobriety of it,

and the modesty of it, to be otherwise.


Why, the enemy is loud; you hear him all night.


If the enemy is an ass and a fool and a prating coxcomb, is it meet,

think you, that we should also, look you, be an ass and a fool and a

prating coxcomb? In your own conscience, now?


will speak lower.


pray you and beseech you that you will.



Though it appear a little out of fashion,

There is much care and valour in this Welshman.


Williams.


Brother John Bates, is not that the morning which breaks yonder?


think it be; but we have no great cause to desire the approach of

day.


We see yonder the beginning of the day, but  think we shall never see

the end of it. Who goes there?


friend.


Under what captain serve you?


Under Sir Thomas Erpingham.


good old commander and a most kind gentleman.  pray you, what thinks

he of our estate?


Even as men wreck’d upon a sand, that look to be wash’d off the next

tide.


He hath not told his thought to the King?


No; nor it is not meet he should. For though  speak it to you,  think

the King is but a man as  am. The violet smells to him as it doth to

me; the element shows to him as it doth to me; all his senses have but

human conditions. His ceremonies laid by, in his nakedness he appears

but a man; and though his affections are higher mounted than ours, yet,

when they stoop, they stoop with the like wing. Therefore, when he sees

reason of fears as we do, his fears, out of doubt, be of the same

relish as ours are; yet, in reason, no man should possess him with any

appearance of fear, lest he, by showing it, should dishearten his army.


He may show what outward courage he will; but  believe, as cold a

night as ’tis, he could wish himself in Thames up to the neck; and so 

would he were, and  by him, at all adventures, so we were quit here.


By my troth,  will speak my conscience of the King:  think he would

not wish himself anywhere but where he is.


Then  would he were here alone; so should he be sure to be ransomed,

and a many poor men’s lives saved.


dare say you love him not so ill, to wish him here alone, howsoeve
you speak this to feel other men’s minds. Methinks  could not die

anywhere so contented as in the King’s company, his cause being just

and his quarrel honourable.


That’s more than we know.


Ay, or more than we should seek after; for we know enough, if we know

we are the King’s subjects. If his cause be wrong, our obedience to the

King wipes the crime of it out of us.


But if the cause be not good, the King himself hath a heavy reckoning

to make, when all those legs and arms and heads, chopp’d off in a

battle, shall join together at the latter day and cry all, “We died at

such a place”; some swearing, some crying for a surgeon, some upon

their wives left poor behind them, some upon the debts they owe, some

upon their children rawly left.  am afeard there are few die well that

die in a battle; for how can they charitably dispose of anything, when

blood is their argument? Now, if these men do not die well, it will be

a black matter for the King that led them to it; who to disobey were

against all proportion of subjection.


So, if a son that is by his father sent about merchandise do sinfully

miscarry upon the sea, the imputation of his wickedness, by your rule,

should be imposed upon his father that sent him; or if a servant, unde
his master’s command transporting a sum of money, be assailed by

robbers and die in many irreconcil’d iniquities, you may call the

business of the master the author of the servant’s damnation. But this

is not so. The King is not bound to answer the particular endings of

his soldiers, the father of his son, nor the master of his servant; fo
they purpose not their death, when they purpose their services.

Besides, there is no king, be his cause never so spotless, if it come

to the arbitrement of swords, can try it out with all unspotted

soldiers. Some peradventure have on them the guilt of premeditated and

contrived murder; some, of beguiling virgins with the broken seals of

perjury; some, making the wars their bulwark, that have before gored

the gentle bosom of Peace with pillage and robbery. Now, if these men

have defeated the law and outrun native punishment, though they can

outstrip men, they have no wings to fly from God. War is his beadle,

war is his vengeance; so that here men are punish’d for before-breach

of the King’s laws in now the King’s quarrel. Where they feared the

death, they have borne life away; and where they would be safe, they

perish. Then if they die unprovided, no more is the King guilty of

their damnation than he was before guilty of those impieties for the

which they are now visited. Every subject’s duty is the King’s; but

every subject’s soul is his own. Therefore should every soldier in the

wars do as every sick man in his bed, wash every mote out of his

conscience; and dying so, death is to him advantage; or not dying, the

time was blessedly lost wherein such preparation was gained; and in him

that escapes, it were not sin to think that, making God so free an

offer, He let him outlive that day to see His greatness and to teach

others how they should prepare.


’Tis certain, every man that dies ill, the ill upon his own head, the

King is not to answer for it.


do not desire he should answer for me; and yet  determine to fight

lustily for him.


myself heard the King say he would not be ransom’d.


Ay, he said so, to make us fight cheerfully; but when our throats are

cut, he may be ransom’d, and we ne’er the wiser.


If  live to see it,  will never trust his word after.


You pay him then. That’s a perilous shot out of an elder-gun, that a

poor and a private displeasure can do against a monarch! You may as

well go about to turn the sun to ice with fanning in his face with a

peacock’s feather. You’ll never trust his word after! Come, ’tis a

foolish saying.


Your reproof is something too round.  should be angry with you, if the

time were convenient.


Let it be a quarrel between us if you live.


embrace it.


How shall  know thee again?


Give me any gage of thine, and  will wear it in my bonnet; then, if

ever thou dar’st acknowledge it,  will make it my quarrel.


Here’s my glove; give me another of thine.


There.


This will  also wear in my cap. If ever thou come to me and say, afte
tomorrow, “This is my glove,” by this hand  will take thee a box on

the ear.


If ever  live to see it,  will challenge it.


Thou dar’st as well be hang’d.


Well,  will do it, though  take thee in the King’s company.


Keep thy word; fare thee well.


Be friends, you English fools, be friends. We have French quarrels

enough, if you could tell how to reckon.


Indeed, the French may lay twenty French crowns to one they will beat

us, for they bear them on their shoulders; but it is no English treason

to cut French crowns, and tomorrow the King himself will be a clipper.


Upon the King! Let us our lives, our souls,

Our debts, our careful wives,

Our children, and our sins lay on the King!

We must bear all.  hard condition,

Twin-born with greatness, subject to the breath

Of every fool, whose sense no more can feel

But his own wringing! What infinite heart’s ease

Must kings neglect, that private men enjoy!

And what have kings, that privates have not too,

Save ceremony, save general ceremony?

And what art thou, thou idol Ceremony?

What kind of god art thou, that suffer’st more

Of mortal griefs than do thy worshippers?

What are thy rents? What are thy comings in?

Ceremony, show me but thy worth!

What is thy soul of adoration?

Art thou aught else but place, degree, and form,

Creating awe and fear in other men?

Wherein thou art less happy being fear’d

Than they in fearing.

What drink’st thou oft, instead of homage sweet,

But poison’d flattery? , be sick, great greatness,

And bid thy Ceremony give thee cure!

Think’st thou the fiery fever will go out

With titles blown from adulation?

Will it give place to flexure and low bending?

Canst thou, when thou command’st the beggar’s knee,

Command the health of it? No, thou proud dream,

That play’st so subtly with a king’s repose;

am a king that find thee, and  know

’Tis not the balm, the sceptre, and the ball,

The sword, the mace, the crown imperial,

The intertissued robe of gold and pearl,

The farced title running ’fore the King,

The throne he sits on, nor the tide of pomp

That beats upon the high shore of this world,

No, not all these, thrice-gorgeous Ceremony,—

Not all these, laid in bed majestical,

Can sleep so soundly as the wretched slave,

Who with a body fill’d and vacant mind

Gets him to rest, cramm’d with distressful bread,

Never sees horrid night, the child of hell,

But, like a lackey, from the rise to set

Sweats in the eye of Phoebus, and all night

Sleeps in Elysium; next day after dawn,

Doth rise and help Hyperion to his horse,

And follows so the ever-running year,

With profitable labour, to his grave:

And, but for ceremony, such a wretch,

Winding up days with toil and nights with sleep,

Had the fore-hand and vantage of a king.

The slave, a member of the country’s peace,

Enjoys it, but in gross brain little wots

What watch the King keeps to maintain the peace,

Whose hours the peasant best advantages.



My lord, your nobles, jealous of your absence,

Seek through your camp to find you.


Good old knight,

Collect them all together at my tent.

’ll be before thee.


shall do’t, my lord.



God of battles! steel my soldiers’ hearts.

Possess them not with fear. Take from them now

The sense of reckoning, if the opposed numbers

Pluck their hearts from them. Not today,  Lord,

, not today, think not upon the fault

My father made in compassing the crown!

Richard’s body have interred new,

And on it have bestow’d more contrite tears

Than from it issued forced drops of blood.

Five hundred poor  have in yearly pay,

Who twice a day their wither’d hands hold up

Toward heaven, to pardon blood; and  have built

Two chantries, where the sad and solemn priests

Sing still for Richard’s soul. More will  do;

Though all that  can do is nothing worth,

Since that my penitence comes after all,

Imploring pardon.



My liege!


My brother Gloucester’s voice? Ay;

know thy errand,  will go with thee.

The day, my friends, and all things stay for me.


The French camp.



The sun doth gild our armour; up, my lords!


_Monte à cheval!_ My horse, _varlet! laquais_, ha!


brave spirit!


_Via, les eaux et terre!_


_Rien puis? ’air et feu?_


_Cieux_, cousin Orleans.


Now, my Lord Constable!


Hark, how our steeds for present service neigh!


Mount them, and make incision in their hides,

That their hot blood may spin in English eyes,

And dout them with superfluous courage, ha!


What, will you have them weep our horses’ blood?

How shall we, then, behold their natural tears?



The English are embattl’d, you French peers.


To horse, you gallant princes! straight to horse!

Do but behold yon poor and starved band,

And your fair show shall suck away their souls,

Leaving them but the shales and husks of men.

There is not work enough for all our hands;

Scarce blood enough in all their sickly veins

To give each naked curtle-axe a stain,

That our French gallants shall today draw out,

And sheathe for lack of sport. Let us but blow on them,

The vapour of our valour will o’erturn them.

’Tis positive ’gainst all exceptions, lords,

That our superfluous lackeys and our peasants,

Who in unnecessary action swarm

About our squares of battle, were enough

To purge this field of such a hilding foe,

Though we upon this mountain’s basis by

Took stand for idle speculation,

But that our honours must not. What’s to say?

very little little let us do,

And all is done. Then let the trumpets sound

The tucket sonance and the note to mount;

For our approach shall so much dare the field

That England shall crouch down in fear and yield.


GRANDPRÉ.

Why do you stay so long, my lords of France?

Yond island carrions, desperate of their bones,

Ill-favouredly become the morning field.

Their ragged curtains poorly are let loose,

And our air shakes them passing scornfully.

Big Mars seems bankrupt in their beggar’d host,

And faintly through a rusty beaver peeps;

The horsemen sit like fixed candlesticks

With torch-staves in their hand; and their poor jades

Lob down their heads, drooping the hides and hips,

The gum down-roping from their pale-dead eyes,

And in their pale dull mouths the gimmal bit

Lies foul with chew’d grass, still, and motionless;

And their executors, the knavish crows,

Fly o’er them, all impatient for their hour.

Description cannot suit itself in words

To demonstrate the life of such a battle,

In life so lifeless as it shows itself.


They have said their prayers, and they stay for death.


Shall we go send them dinners and fresh suits

And give their fasting horses provender,

And after fight with them?


stay but for my guard; on to the field!

will the banner from a trumpet take,

And use it for my haste. Come, come, away!

The sun is high, and we outwear the day.


The English camp.


Salisbury and Westmorland.


Where is the King?


The King himself is rode to view their battle.


Of fighting men they have full three-score thousand.


There’s five to one; besides, they all are fresh.


God’s arm strike with us! ’tis a fearful odds.

God be wi’ you, princes all; ’ll to my charge.

If we no more meet till we meet in heaven,

Then, joyfully, my noble Lord of Bedford,

My dear Lord Gloucester, and my good Lord Exeter,

And my kind kinsman, warriors all, adieu!


Farewell, good Salisbury, and good luck go with thee!


Farewell, kind lord; fight valiantly today!

And yet  do thee wrong to mind thee of it,

For thou art fram’d of the firm truth of valour.



He is as full of valour as of kindness,

Princely in both.



that we now had here

But one ten thousand of those men in England

That do no work today!


What’s he that wishes so?

My cousin Westmorland? No, my fair cousin.

If we are mark’d to die, we are enough

To do our country loss; and if to live,

The fewer men, the greater share of honour.

God’s will!  pray thee, wish not one man more.

By Jove,  am not covetous for gold,

Nor care  who doth feed upon my cost;

It yearns me not if men my garments wear;

Such outward things dwell not in my desires;

But if it be a sin to covet honour,

am the most offending soul alive.

No, faith, my coz, wish not a man from England.

God’s peace!  would not lose so great an honou
As one man more, methinks, would share from me

For the best hope  have. , do not wish one more!

Rather proclaim it, Westmorland, through my host,

That he which hath no stomach to this fight,

Let him depart. His passport shall be made,

And crowns for convoy put into his purse.

We would not die in that man’s company

That fears his fellowship to die with us.

This day is call’d the feast of Crispian.

He that outlives this day, and comes safe home,

Will stand a tip-toe when this day is named,

And rouse him at the name of Crispian.

He that shall live this day, and see old age,

Will yearly on the vigil feast his neighbours,

And say, “Tomorrow is Saint Crispian.”

Then will he strip his sleeve and show his scars,

And say, “These wounds  had on Crispian’s day.”

Old men forget; yet all shall be forgot,

But he’ll remember with advantages

What feats he did that day. Then shall our names,

Familiar in his mouth as household words,

Harry the King, Bedford, and Exeter,

Warwick and Talbot, Salisbury and Gloucester,

Be in their flowing cups freshly remembered.

This story shall the good man teach his son;

And Crispin Crispian shall ne’er go by,

From this day to the ending of the world,

But we in it shall be remembered,

We few, we happy few, we band of brothers.

For he today that sheds his blood with me

Shall be my brother; be he ne’er so vile,

This day shall gentle his condition;

And gentlemen in England now abed

Shall think themselves accurs’d they were not here,

And hold their manhoods cheap whiles any speaks

That fought with us upon Saint Crispin’s day.



My sovereign lord, bestow yourself with speed.

The French are bravely in their battles set,

And will with all expedience charge on us.


All things are ready, if our minds be so.


Perish the man whose mind is backward now!


Thou dost not wish more help from England, coz?


God’s will! my liege, would you and  alone,

Without more help, could fight this royal battle!


Why, now thou hast unwish’d five thousand men,

Which likes me better than to wish us one.

You know your places. God be with you all!



Once more  come to know of thee, King Harry,

If for thy ransom thou wilt now compound,

Before thy most assured overthrow;

For certainly thou art so near the gulf,

Thou needs must be englutted. Besides, in mercy,

The Constable desires thee thou wilt mind

Thy followers of repentance; that their souls

May make a peaceful and a sweet retire

From off these fields, where, wretches, their poor bodies

Must lie and fester.


Who hath sent thee now?


The Constable of France.


pray thee, bear my former answer back:

Bid them achieve me and then sell my bones.

Good God! why should they mock poor fellows thus?

The man that once did sell the lion’s skin

While the beast liv’d, was kill’d with hunting him.

many of our bodies shall no doubt

Find native graves, upon the which,  trust,

Shall witness live in brass of this day’s work;

And those that leave their valiant bones in France,

Dying like men, though buried in your dunghills,

They shall be fam’d; for there the sun shall greet them,

And draw their honours reeking up to heaven;

Leaving their earthly parts to choke your clime,

The smell whereof shall breed a plague in France.

Mark then abounding valour in our English,

That being dead, like to the bullet’s grazing,

Break out into a second course of mischief,

Killing in relapse of mortality.

Let me speak proudly: tell the Constable

We are but warriors for the working-day.

Our gayness and our gilt are all besmirch’d

With rainy marching in the painful field;

There’s not a piece of feather in our host—

Good argument,  hope, we will not fly—

And time hath worn us into slovenry;

But, by the mass, our hearts are in the trim;

And my poor soldiers tell me, yet ere night

They’ll be in fresher robes, or they will pluck

The gay new coats o’er the French soldiers’ heads

And turn them out of service. If they do this—

As, if God please, they shall,—my ransom then

Will soon be levied. Herald, save thou thy labour.

Come thou no more for ransom, gentle herald.

They shall have none,  swear, but these my joints;

Which if they have as  will leave ’em them,

Shall yield them little, tell the Constable.


shall, King Harry. And so fare thee well;

Thou never shalt hear herald any more.



fear thou’lt once more come again for ransom.



My lord, most humbly on my knee  beg

The leading of the vaward.


Take it, brave York. Now, soldiers, march away;

And how thou pleasest, God, dispose the day!


The field of battle.



Yield, cur!


_Je pense que vous êtes le gentilhomme de bonne qualité._


_Qualité? Caleno custore me!_

Art thou a gentleman?

What is thy name? Discuss.


_O Seigneur Dieu!_


, Signieur Dew should be a gentleman.

Perpend my words,  Signieur Dew, and mark:

Signieur Dew, thou diest on point of fox,

Except,  signieur, thou do give to me

Egregious ransom.


_O, prenez miséricorde! Ayez pitié de moi!_


Moy shall not serve;  will have forty moys,

Or  will fetch thy rim out at thy throat

In drops of crimson blood.


_Est-il impossible d’échapper la force de ton bras?_


Brass, cur!

Thou damned and luxurious mountain goat,

Offer’st me brass?


_O pardonnez-moi!_


Say’st thou me so? Is that a ton of moys?

Come hither, boy; ask me this slave in French

What is his name.


_Écoutez. Comment êtes-vous appelé?_


_Monsieur le Fer._


He says his name is Master Fer.


Master Fer! ’ll fer him, and firk him, and ferret him.

Discuss the same in French unto him.


do not know the French for fer, and ferret, and firk.


Bid him prepare; for  will cut his throat.


_Que dit-il, monsieur?_


_Il me commande à vous dire que vous faites vous prêt, car ce soldat

ici est disposé tout à cette heure de couper votre gorge._


Owy, cuppele gorge, permafoy,

Peasant, unless thou give me crowns, brave crowns;

Or mangled shalt thou be by this my sword.


_O, je vous supplie, pour l’amour de Dieu, me pardonner! Je suis le

gentilhomme de bonne maison; gardez ma vie, et je vous donnerai deux

cents écus._


What are his words?


He prays you to save his life. He is a gentleman of a good house; and

for his ransom he will give you two hundred crowns.


Tell him my fury shall abate, and 

The crowns will take.


_Petit monsieur, que dit-il?_


_Encore qu’il est contre son jurement de pardonner aucun prisonnier;

néanmoins, pour les écus que vous lui avez promis, il est content à

vous donner la liberté, le franchisement._


_Sur mes genoux je vous donne mille remerciements; et je m’estime

heureux que je suis tombé entre les mains d’un chevalier, je pense, le

plus brave, vaillant, et très distingué seigneur d’Angleterre._


Expound unto me, boy.


He gives you upon his knees, a thousand thanks; and he esteems himself

happy that he hath fallen into the hands of one, as he thinks, the most

brave, valorous, and thrice-worthy _seigneur_ of England.


As  suck blood,  will some mercy show.

Follow me!


_Suivez-vous le grand capitaine._


did never know so full a voice issue from so empty a heart; but the

saying is true, “The empty vessel makes the greatest sound.” Bardolph

and Nym had ten times more valour than this roaring devil i’ the old

play, that everyone may pare his nails with a wooden dagger; and they

are both hang’d; and so would this be, if he durst steal anything

adventurously.  must stay with the lackeys with the luggage of ou
camp. The French might have a good prey of us, if he knew of it; fo
there is none to guard it but boys.


. Another part of the field.



_O diable!_


_O Seigneur! le jour est perdu, tout est perdu!_


_Mort de ma vie!_ all is confounded, all!

Reproach and everlasting shame

Sits mocking in our plumes.


_O méchante Fortune!_ Do not run away.


Why, all our ranks are broke.


perdurable shame! Let’s stab ourselves,

Be these the wretches that we play’d at dice for?


Is this the king we sent to for his ransom?


Shame and eternal shame, nothing but shame!

Let’s die in honour! Once more back again!

And he that will not follow Bourbon now,

Let him go hence, and with his cap in hand,

Like a base pandar, hold the chamber doo
Whilst by a slave, no gentler than my dog,

His fairest daughter is contaminated.


Disorder, that hath spoil’d us, friend us now!

Let us on heaps go offer up our lives.


We are enough yet living in the field

To smother up the English in our throngs,

If any order might be thought upon.


The devil take order now! ’ll to the throng.

Let life be short, else shame will be too long.


Another part of the field.



Well have we done, thrice valiant countrymen.

But all’s not done; yet keep the French the field.


The Duke of York commends him to your Majesty.


Lives he, good uncle? Thrice within this hou
saw him down; thrice up again, and fighting.

From helmet to the spur all blood he was.


In which array, brave soldier, doth he lie,

Larding the plain; and by his bloody side,

Yoke-fellow to his honour-owing wounds,

The noble Earl of Suffolk also lies.

Suffolk first died; and York, all haggled over,

Comes to him, where in gore he lay insteeped,

And takes him by the beard; kisses the gashes

That bloodily did yawn upon his face.

He cries aloud, “Tarry, my cousin Suffolk!

My soul shall thine keep company to heaven;

Tarry, sweet soul, for mine, then fly abreast,

As in this glorious and well-foughten field

We kept together in our chivalry.”

Upon these words  came and cheer’d him up.

He smil’d me in the face, raught me his hand,

And, with a feeble gripe, says, “Dear my lord,

Commend my service to my sovereign.”

So did he turn and over Suffolk’s neck

He threw his wounded arm and kiss’d his lips;

And so espous’d to death, with blood he seal’d

testament of noble-ending love.

The pretty and sweet manner of it forc’d

Those waters from me which  would have stopp’d;

But  had not so much of man in me,

And all my mother came into mine eyes

And gave me up to tears.


blame you not;

For, hearing this,  must perforce compound

With mistful eyes, or they will issue too.


But hark! what new alarum is this same?

The French have reinforc’d their scatter’d men.

Then every soldier kill his prisoners;

Give the word through.


Another part of the field.



Kill the poys and the luggage! ’Tis expressly against the law of arms.

’Tis as arrant a piece of knavery, mark you now, as can be offer’t; in

your conscience, now, is it not?


’Tis certain there’s not a boy left alive; and the cowardly rascals

that ran from the battle ha’ done this slaughter. Besides, they have

burned and carried away all that was in the King’s tent; wherefore the

King, most worthily, hath caus’d every soldier to cut his prisoner’s

throat. , ’tis a gallant king!


Ay, he was porn at Monmouth, Captain Gower. What call you the town’s

name where Alexander the Pig was born?


Alexander the Great.


Why,  pray you, is not pig great? The pig, or the great, or the

mighty, or the huge, or the magnanimous, are all one reckonings, save

the phrase is a little variations.


think Alexander the Great was born in Macedon. His father was called

Philip of Macedon, as  take it.


think it is in Macedon where Alexander is porn.  tell you, Captain,

if you look in the maps of the ’orld,  warrant you sall find, in the

comparisons between Macedon and Monmouth, that the situations, look

you, is both alike. There is a river in Macedon; and there is also

moreover a river at Monmouth; it is call’d Wye at Monmouth; but it is

out of my prains what is the name of the other river; but ’tis all one,

’tis alike as my fingers is to my fingers, and there is salmons in

both. If you mark Alexander’s life well, Harry of Monmouth’s life is

come after it indifferent well; for there is figures in all things.

Alexander, God knows, and you know, in his rages, and his furies, and

his wraths, and his cholers, and his moods, and his displeasures, and

his indignations, and also being a little intoxicates in his prains,

did, in his ales and his angers, look you, kill his best friend,

Cleitus.


Our King is not like him in that. He never kill’d any of his friends.


It is not well done, mark you now, to take the tales out of my mouth,

ere it is made and finished.  speak but in the figures and comparisons

of it. As Alexander kill’d his friend Cleitus, being in his ales and

his cups; so also Harry Monmouth, being in his right wits and his good

judgements, turn’d away the fat knight with the great belly doublet. He

was full of jests, and gipes, and knaveries, and mocks;  have forgot

his name.


Sir John Falstaff.


That is he. ’ll tell you there is good men porn at Monmouth.


Here comes his Majesty.


prisoners. Flourish.


was not angry since  came to France

Until this instant. Take a trumpet, herald;

Ride thou unto the horsemen on yond hill.

If they will fight with us, bid them come down,

Or void the field; they do offend our sight.

If they’ll do neither, we will come to them,

And make them skirr away, as swift as stones

Enforced from the old Assyrian slings.

Besides, we’ll cut the throats of those we have,

And not a man of them that we shall take

Shall taste our mercy. Go and tell them so.



Here comes the herald of the French, my liege.


His eyes are humbler than they us’d to be.


How now! what means this, herald? Know’st thou not

That  have fin’d these bones of mine for ransom?

Com’st thou again for ransom?


No, great King;

come to thee for charitable license,

That we may wander o’er this bloody field

To book our dead, and then to bury them;

To sort our nobles from our common men.

For many of our princes—woe the while!—

Lie drown’d and soak’d in mercenary blood;

So do our vulgar drench their peasant limbs

In blood of princes; and their wounded steeds

Fret fetlock deep in gore, and with wild rage

Yerk out their armed heels at their dead masters,

Killing them twice. , give us leave, great King,

To view the field in safety, and dispose

Of their dead bodies!


tell thee truly, herald,

know not if the day be ours or no;

For yet a many of your horsemen pee
And gallop o’er the field.


The day is yours.


Praised be God, and not our strength, for it!

What is this castle call’d that stands hard by?


They call it Agincourt.


Then call we this the field of Agincourt,

Fought on the day of Crispin Crispianus.


Your grandfather of famous memory, an’t please your Majesty, and you
great-uncle Edward the Plack Prince of Wales, as  have read in the

chronicles, fought a most prave pattle here in France.


They did, Fluellen.


Your Majesty says very true. If your Majesties is rememb’red of it, the

Welshmen did good service in garden where leeks did grow, wearing leeks

in their Monmouth caps; which, your Majesty know, to this hour is an

honourable badge of the service; and  do believe your Majesty takes no

scorn to wear the leek upon Saint Tavy’s day.


wear it for a memorable honour;

For  am Welsh, you know, good countryman.


All the water in Wye cannot wash your Majesty’s Welsh plood out of you
pody,  can tell you that. Got pless it and preserve it, as long as it

pleases His grace, and His majesty too!


Thanks, good my countryman.


By Jeshu,  am your Majesty’s countryman,  care not who know it. 

will confess it to all the ’orld.  need not be asham’d of you
Majesty, praised be God, so long as your Majesty is an honest man.


God keep me so!


Our heralds go with him;

Bring me just notice of the numbers dead

On both our parts. Call yonder fellow hither.



Soldier, you must come to the King.


Soldier, why wear’st thou that glove in thy cap?


An’t please your Majesty, ’tis the gage of one that  should fight

withal, if he be alive.


An Englishman?


An’t please your Majesty, a rascal that swagger’d with me last night;

who, if alive and ever dare to challenge this glove,  have sworn to

take him a box o’ the ear; or if  can see my glove in his cap, which

he swore, as he was a soldier, he would wear if alive,  will strike it

out soundly.


What think you, Captain Fluellen, is it fit this soldier keep his oath?


He is a craven and a villain else, an’t please your Majesty, in my

conscience.


It may be his enemy is a gentlemen of great sort, quite from the answe
of his degree.


Though he be as good a gentleman as the devil is, as Lucifier and

Belzebub himself, it is necessary, look your Grace, that he keep his

vow and his oath. If he be perjur’d, see you now, his reputation is as

arrant a villain and a Jacksauce, as ever his black shoe trod upon

God’s ground and His earth, in my conscience, la!


Then keep thy vow, sirrah, when thou meet’st the fellow.


So  will, my liege, as  live.


Who serv’st thou under?


Under Captain Gower, my liege.


Gower is a good captain, and is good knowledge and literatured in the

wars.


Call him hither to me, soldier.


will, my liege.



Here, Fluellen; wear thou this favour for me and stick it in thy cap.

When Alençon and myself were down together,  pluck’d this glove from

his helm. If any man challenge this, he is a friend to Alençon, and an

enemy to our person. If thou encounter any such, apprehend him, an thou

dost me love.


Your Grace does me as great honours as can be desir’d in the hearts of

his subjects.  would fain see the man, that has but two legs, that

shall find himself aggrief’d at this glove; that is all. But  would

fain see it once, an please God of His grace that  might see.


Know’st thou Gower?


He is my dear friend, an please you.


Pray thee, go seek him, and bring him to my tent.


will fetch him.



My Lord of Warwick, and my brother Gloucester,

Follow Fluellen closely at the heels.

The glove which  have given him for a favou
May haply purchase him a box o’ the ear.

It is the soldier’s;  by bargain should

Wear it myself. Follow, good cousin Warwick.

If that the soldier strike him, as  judge

By his blunt bearing he will keep his word,

Some sudden mischief may arise of it;

For  do know Fluellen valiant

And, touch’d with choler, hot as gunpowder,

And quickly will return an injury.

Follow, and see there be no harm between them.

Go you with me, uncle of Exeter.


Before King Henry’s pavilion.



warrant it is to knight you, Captain.



God’s will and his pleasure, captain,  beseech you now, come apace to

the King. There is more good toward you peradventure than is in you
knowledge to dream of.


Sir, know you this glove?


Know the glove!  know the glove is a glove.


know this; and thus  challenge it.



’Sblood! an arrant traitor as any is in the universal world, or in

France, or in England!


How now, sir! you villain!


Do you think ’ll be forsworn?


Stand away, Captain Gower.  will give treason his payment into plows,

warrant you.


am no traitor.


That’s a lie in thy throat.  charge you in his Majesty’s name,

apprehend him; he’s a friend of the Duke Alençon’s.



How now, how now! what’s the matter?


My lord of Warwick, here is—praised be God for it!—a most contagious

treason come to light, look you, as you shall desire in a summer’s day.

Here is his Majesty.



How now! what’s the matter?


My liege, here is a villain and a traitor, that, look your Grace, has

struck the glove which your Majesty is take out of the helmet of

Alençon.


My liege, this was my glove; here is the fellow of it; and he that 

gave it to in change promis’d to wear it in his cap.  promis’d to

strike him, if he did.  met this man with my glove in his cap, and 

have been as good as my word.


Your Majesty hear now, saving your Majesty’s manhood, what an arrant,

rascally, beggarly, lousy knave it is.  hope your Majesty is pear me

testimony and witness, and will avouchment, that this is the glove of

Alençon that your Majesty is give me; in your conscience, now?


Give me thy glove, soldier. Look, here is the fellow of it.

’Twas , indeed, thou promisedst to strike;

And thou hast given me most bitter terms.


An it please your Majesty, let his neck answer for it, if there is any

martial law in the world.


How canst thou make me satisfaction?


All offences, my lord, come from the heart. Never came any from mine

that might offend your Majesty.


It was ourself thou didst abuse.


Your Majesty came not like yourself. You appear’d to me but as a common

man; witness the night, your garments, your lowliness; and what you
Highness suffer’d under that shape,  beseech you take it for your own

fault and not mine; for had you been as  took you for,  made no

offence; therefore,  beseech your Highness, pardon me.


Here, uncle Exeter, fill this glove with crowns,

And give it to this fellow. Keep it, fellow;

And wear it for an honour in thy cap

Till  do challenge it. Give him his crowns;

And, captain, you must needs be friends with him.


By this day and this light, the fellow has mettle enough in his belly.

Hold, there is twelve pence for you; and  pray you to serve God, and

keep you out of prawls, and prabbles, and quarrels, and dissensions,

and,  warrant you, it is the better for you.


will none of your money.


It is with a good will;  can tell you, it will serve you to mend you
shoes. Come, wherefore should you be so pashful? Your shoes is not so

good. ’Tis a good silling,  warrant you, or  will change it.



Now, herald, are the dead numb’red?


Here is the number of the slaught’red French.


What prisoners of good sort are taken, uncle?


Charles Duke of Orleans, nephew to the King;

John Duke of Bourbon, and Lord Boucicault:

Of other lords and barons, knights and squires,

Full fifteen hundred, besides common men.


This note doth tell me of ten thousand French

That in the field lie slain; of princes, in this number,

And nobles bearing banners, there lie dead

One hundred twenty-six; added to these,

Of knights, esquires, and gallant gentlemen,

Eight thousand and four hundred; of the which,

Five hundred were but yesterday dubb’d knights;

So that, in these ten thousand they have lost,

There are but sixteen hundred mercenaries;

The rest are princes, barons, lords, knights, squires,

And gentlemen of blood and quality.

The names of those their nobles that lie dead:

Charles Delabreth, High Constable of France;

Jacques of Chatillon, Admiral of France;

The master of the Crossbows, Lord Rambures;

Great Master of France, the brave Sir Guichard Dauphin,

John, Duke of Alençon, Anthony, Duke of Brabant,

The brother to the Duke of Burgundy,

And Edward, Duke of Bar; of lusty earls,

Grandpré and Roussi, Fauconbridge and Foix,

Beaumont and Marle, Vaudemont and Lestrale.

Here was a royal fellowship of death!

Where is the number of our English dead?


Edward the Duke of York, the Earl of Suffolk,

Sir Richard Ketly, Davy Gam, esquire;

None else of name; and of all other men

But five and twenty.— God, thy arm was here;

And not to us, but to thy arm alone,

Ascribe we all! When, without stratagem,

But in plain shock and even play of battle,

Was ever known so great and little loss

On one part and on the other? Take it, God,

For it is none but thine!


’Tis wonderful!


Come, go we in procession to the village;

And be it death proclaimed through our host

To boast of this or take that praise from God

Which is His only.


Is it not lawful, an please your Majesty, to tell how many is kill’d?


Yes, Captain; but with this acknowledgment,

That God fought for us.


Yes, my conscience, He did us great good.


Do we all holy rites.

Let there be sung _Non nobis_ and _Te Deum_,

The dead with charity enclos’d in clay,

And then to Calais; and to England then,

Where ne’er from France arriv’d more happy men.





Vouchsafe to those that have not read the story,

That  may prompt them; and of such as have,

humbly pray them to admit the excuse

Of time, of numbers, and due course of things,

Which cannot in their huge and proper life

Be here presented. Now we bear the King

Toward Calais; grant him there; there seen,

Heave him away upon your winged thoughts

Athwart the sea. Behold, the English beach

Pales in the flood with men, with wives and boys,

Whose shouts and claps out-voice the deep-mouth’d sea,

Which like a mighty whiffler ’fore the King

Seems to prepare his way. So let him land,

And solemnly see him set on to London.

So swift a pace hath thought that even now

You may imagine him upon Blackheath,

Where that his lords desire him to have borne

His bruised helmet and his bended sword

Before him through the city. He forbids it,

Being free from vainness and self-glorious pride;

Giving full trophy, signal, and ostent

Quite from himself to God. But now behold,

In the quick forge and working-house of thought,

How London doth pour out her citizens!

The mayor and all his brethren in best sort,

Like to the senators of th’ antique Rome,

With the plebeians swarming at their heels,

Go forth and fetch their conquering Caesar in;

As, by a lower but loving likelihood,

Were now the general of our gracious empress,

As in good time he may, from Ireland coming,

Bringing rebellion broached on his sword,

How many would the peaceful city quit,

To welcome him! Much more, and much more cause,

Did they this Harry. Now in London place him;

As yet the lamentation of the French

Invites the King of England’s stay at home,

The Emperor’s coming in behalf of France,

To order peace between them;—and omit

All the occurrences, whatever chanc’d,

Till Harry’s back-return again to France.

There must we bring him; and myself have play’d

The interim, by rememb’ring you ’tis past.

Then brook abridgement, and your eyes advance

After your thoughts, straight back again to France.


. France. The English camp.



Nay, that’s right; but why wear you your leek today?

Saint Davy’s day is past.


There is occasions and causes why and wherefore in all things.  will

tell you ass my friend, Captain Gower. The rascally, scald, beggarly,

lousy, pragging knave, Pistol, which you and yourself and all the world

know to be no petter than a fellow, look you now, of no merits, he is

come to me and prings me pread and salt yesterday, look you, and bid me

eat my leek. It was in a place where  could not breed no contention

with him; but  will be so bold as to wear it in my cap till  see him

once again, and then  will tell him a little piece of my desires.



Why, here he comes, swelling like a turkey-cock.


’Tis no matter for his swellings nor his turkey-cocks. God pless you,

Anchient Pistol! you scurvy, lousy knave, God pless you!


Ha! art thou bedlam? Dost thou thirst, base Trojan,

To have me fold up Parca’s fatal web?

Hence!  am qualmish at the smell of leek.


peseech you heartily, scurfy, lousy knave, at my desires, and my

requests, and my petitions, to eat, look you, this leek. Because, look

you, you do not love it, nor your affections and your appetites and

your digestions does not agree with it,  would desire you to eat it.


Not for Cadwallader and all his goats.


There is one goat for you.  Will you be so good, scald

knave, as eat it?


Base Trojan, thou shalt die.


You say very true, scald knave, when God’s will is.  will desire you

to live in the mean time, and eat your victuals. Come, there is sauce

for it.  You call’d me yesterday mountain-squire; but 

will make you today a squire of low degree.  pray you, fall to; if you

can mock a leek, you can eat a leek.


Enough, captain; you have astonish’d him.


say,  will make him eat some part of my leek, or  will peat his

pate four days. Bite,  pray you; it is good for your green wound and

your ploody coxcomb.


Must  bite?


Yes, certainly, and out of doubt and out of question too, and

ambiguities.


By this leek,  will most horribly revenge.  eat and eat,  swear—


Eat,  pray you. Will you have some more sauce to your leek? There is

not enough leek to swear by.


Quiet thy cudgel; thou dost see  eat.


Much good do you, scald knave, heartily. Nay, pray you, throw none

away; the skin is good for your broken coxcomb. When you take occasions

to see leeks hereafter,  pray you, mock at ’em; that is all.


Good.


Ay, leeks is good. Hold you, there is a groat to heal your pate.


Me a groat!


Yes, verily and in truth you shall take it; or  have another leek in

my pocket, which you shall eat.


take thy groat in earnest of revenge.


If  owe you anything  will pay you in cudgels. You shall be a

woodmonger, and buy nothing of me but cudgels. God be wi’ you, and keep

you, and heal your pate.



All hell shall stir for this.


Go, go; you are a couterfeit cowardly knave. Will you mock at an

ancient tradition, begun upon an honourable respect, and worn as a

memorable trophy of predeceased valour, and dare not avouch in you
deeds any of your words?  have seen you gleeking and galling at this

gentleman twice or thrice. You thought, because he could not speak

English in the native garb, he could not therefore handle an English

cudgel. You find it otherwise; and henceforth let a Welsh correction

teach you a good English condition. Fare ye well.



Doth Fortune play the huswife with me now?

News have , that my Doll is dead i’ the spital

Of malady of France;

And there my rendezvous is quite cut off.

Old  do wax; and from my weary limbs

Honour is cudgell’d. Well, bawd ’ll turn,

And something lean to cutpurse of quick hand.

To England will  steal, and there ’ll steal;

And patches will  get unto these cudgell’d scars,

And swear  got them in the Gallia wars.


France.  royal palace.


Westmorland, Clarence, Huntingdon and other Lords. At another, Queen

Isabel, the French King, the Princess Katharine, Alice, and othe
Ladies; the Duke of Burgundy and other French.


Peace to this meeting, wherefore we are met!

Unto our brother France, and to our sister,

Health and fair time of day; joy and good wishes

To our most fair and princely cousin Katharine;

And, as a branch and member of this royalty,

By whom this great assembly is contriv’d,

We do salute you, Duke of Burgundy;

And, princes French, and peers, health to you all!


Right joyous are we to behold your face,

Most worthy brother England; fairly met!

So are you, princes English, every one.


So happy be the issue, brother England,

Of this good day and of this gracious meeting

As we are now glad to behold your eyes;

Your eyes, which hitherto have borne in them

Against the French that met them in their bent

The fatal balls of murdering basilisks.

The venom of such looks, we fairly hope,

Have lost their quality; and that this day

Shall change all griefs and quarrels into love.


To cry amen to that, thus we appear.


You English princes all,  do salute you.


My duty to you both, on equal love,

Great Kings of France and England! That  have labour’d,

With all my wits, my pains, and strong endeavours,

To bring your most imperial Majesties

Unto this bar and royal interview,

Your mightiness on both parts best can witness.

Since then my office hath so far prevail’d

That, face to face and royal eye to eye,

You have congreeted, let it not disgrace me

If  demand, before this royal view,

What rub or what impediment there is,

Why that the naked, poor, and mangled Peace,

Dear nurse of arts, plenties, and joyful births,

Should not in this best garden of the world,

Our fertile France, put up her lovely visage?

Alas, she hath from France too long been chas’d,

And all her husbandry doth lie on heaps,

Corrupting in it own fertility.

Her vine, the merry cheerer of the heart,

Unpruned dies; her hedges even-pleach’d,

Like prisoners wildly overgrown with hair,

Put forth disorder’d twigs; her fallow leas

The darnel, hemlock, and rank fumitory,

Doth root upon, while that the coulter rusts

That should deracinate such savagery;

The even mead, that erst brought sweetly forth

The freckled cowslip, burnet, and green clover,

Wanting the scythe, all uncorrected, rank,

Conceives by idleness, and nothing teems

But hateful docks, rough thistles, kecksies, burs,

Losing both beauty and utility;

And as our vineyards, fallows, meads, and hedges,

Defective in their natures, grow to wildness.

Even so our houses and ourselves and children

Have lost, or do not learn for want of time,

The sciences that should become our country;

But grow like savages,—as soldiers will

That nothing do but meditate on blood,—

To swearing and stern looks, diffus’d attire,

And everything that seems unnatural.

Which to reduce into our former favou
You are assembled; and my speech entreats

That  may know the let, why gentle Peace

Should not expel these inconveniences

And bless us with her former qualities.


If, Duke of Burgundy, you would the peace,

Whose want gives growth to the imperfections

Which you have cited, you must buy that peace

With full accord to all our just demands;

Whose tenours and particular effects

You have enschedul’d briefly in your hands.


The King hath heard them; to the which as yet

There is no answer made.


Well, then, the peace,

Which you before so urg’d, lies in his answer.


have but with a cursorary eye

’erglanc’d the articles. Pleaseth your Grace

To appoint some of your council presently

To sit with us once more, with better heed

To re-survey them, we will suddenly

Pass our accept and peremptory answer.


Brother, we shall. Go, uncle Exeter,

And brother Clarence, and you, brother Gloucester,

Warwick, and Huntington, go with the King;

And take with you free power to ratify,

Augment, or alter, as your wisdoms best

Shall see advantageable for our dignity,

Anything in or out of our demands,

And we’ll consign thereto. Will you, fair sister,

Go with the princes, or stay here with us?


Our gracious brother,  will go with them.

Haply a woman’s voice may do some good,

When articles too nicely urg’d be stood on.


Yet leave our cousin Katharine here with us:

She is our capital demand, compris’d

Within the fore-rank of our articles.


She hath good leave.



Fair Katharine, and most fair,

Will you vouchsafe to teach a soldier terms

Such as will enter at a lady’s ea
And plead his love-suit to her gentle heart?


Your Majesty shall mock me;  cannot speak your England.


fair Katharine, if you will love me soundly with your French heart, 

will be glad to hear you confess it brokenly with your English tongue.

Do you like me, Kate?


_Pardonnez-moi_,  cannot tell wat is “like me.”


An angel is like you, Kate, and you are like an angel.


_Que dit-il? Que je suis semblable à les anges?_


_Oui, vraiment, sauf votre Grâce, ainsi dit-il._


said so, dear Katharine; and  must not blush to affirm it.


_O bon Dieu! les langues des hommes sont pleines de tromperies._


What says she, fair one? That the tongues of men are full of deceits?


_Oui_, dat de tongues of de mans is be full of deceits: dat is de

Princess.


The Princess is the better Englishwoman. ’ faith, Kate, my wooing is

fit for thy understanding.  am glad thou canst speak no bette
English; for if thou couldst, thou wouldst find me such a plain king

that thou wouldst think  had sold my farm to buy my crown.  know no

ways to mince it in love, but directly to say, “ love you”; then if

you urge me farther than to say, “Do you in faith?”  wear out my suit.

Give me your answer; i’ faith, do; and so clap hands and a bargain. How

say you, lady?


_Sauf votre honneur_, me understand well.


Marry, if you would put me to verses, or to dance for your sake, Kate,

why you undid me; for the one,  have neither words nor measure, and

for the other  have no strength in measure, yet a reasonable measure

in strength. If  could win a lady at leap-frog, or by vaulting into my

saddle with my armour on my back, under the correction of bragging be

it spoken,  should quickly leap into a wife. Or if  might buffet fo
my love, or bound my horse for her favours,  could lay on like a

butcher and sit like a jack-an-apes, never off. But, before God, Kate,

cannot look greenly, nor gasp out my eloquence, nor  have no cunning

in protestation; only downright oaths, which  never use till urg’d,

nor never break for urging. If thou canst love a fellow of this temper,

Kate, whose face is not worth sunburning, that never looks in his glass

for love of anything he sees there, let thine eye be thy cook.  speak

to thee plain soldier. If thou canst love me for this, take me; if not,

to say to thee that  shall die, is true; but for thy love, by the

Lord, no; yet  love thee too. And while thou liv’st, dear Kate, take a

fellow of plain and uncoined constancy; for he perforce must do thee

right, because he hath not the gift to woo in other places; for these

fellows of infinite tongue, that can rhyme themselves into ladies’

favours, they do always reason themselves out again. What! a speaker is

but a prater: a rhyme is but a ballad.  good leg will fall; a straight

back will stoop; a black beard will turn white; a curl’d pate will grow

bald; a fair face will wither; a full eye will wax hollow; but a good

heart, Kate, is the sun and the moon; or rather the sun and not the

moon; for it shines bright and never changes, but keeps his course

truly. If thou would have such a one, take me; and take me, take a

soldier; take a soldier, take a king. And what say’st thou then to my

love? Speak, my fair, and fairly,  pray thee.


Is it possible dat  should love de enemy of France?


No; it is not possible you should love the enemy of France, Kate; but,

in loving me, you should love the friend of France; for  love France

so well that  will not part with a village of it,  will have it all

mine; and, Kate, when France is mine and  am yours, then yours is

France and you are mine.


cannot tell wat is dat.


No, Kate?  will tell thee in French; which  am sure will hang upon my

tongue like a new-married wife about her husband’s neck, hardly to be

shook off. _Je quand sur le possession de France, et quand vous avez le

possession de moi_,—let me see, what then? Saint Denis be my

speed!—_donc votre est France, et vous êtes mienne._ It is as easy fo
me, Kate, to conquer the kingdom as to speak so much more French. 

shall never move thee in French, unless it be to laugh at me.


_Sauf votre honneur, le français que vous parlez, il est meilleur que

l’anglais lequel je parle._


No, faith, is’t not, Kate; but thy speaking of my tongue, and  thine,

most truly-falsely, must needs be granted to be much at one. But, Kate,

dost thou understand thus much English: canst thou love me?


cannot tell.


Can any of your neighbours tell, Kate? ’ll ask them. Come,  know thou

lovest me; and at night, when you come into your closet, you’ll

question this gentlewoman about me; and  know, Kate, you will to he
dispraise those parts in me that you love with your heart. But, good

Kate, mock me mercifully; the rather, gentle princess, because  love

thee cruelly. If ever thou beest mine, Kate, as  have a saving faith

within me tells me thou shalt,  get thee with scambling, and thou must

therefore needs prove a good soldier-breeder. Shall not thou and ,

between Saint Denis and Saint George, compound a boy, half French, half

English, that shall go to Constantinople and take the Turk by the

beard? Shall we not? What say’st thou, my fair flower-de-luce?


do not know dat.


No; ’tis hereafter to know, but now to promise. Do but now promise,

Kate, you will endeavour for your French part of such a boy; and for my

English moiety, take the word of a king and a bachelor. How answer you,

_la plus belle Katherine du monde, mon très cher et divin déesse?_


Your Majestee ’ave _fausse_ French enough to deceive de most _sage

demoiselle_ dat is _en France_.


Now, fie upon my false French! By mine honour, in true English,  love

thee, Kate; by which honour  dare not swear thou lovest me; yet my

blood begins to flatter me that thou dost, notwithstanding the poor and

untempering effect of my visage. Now, beshrew my father’s ambition! He

was thinking of civil wars when he got me; therefore was  created with

a stubborn outside, with an aspect of iron, that, when  come to woo

ladies,  fright them. But, in faith, Kate, the elder  wax, the bette
shall appear. My comfort is, that old age, that ill layer up of

beauty, can do no more spoil upon my face. Thou hast me, if thou hast

me, at the worst; and thou shalt wear me, if thou wear me, better and

better; and therefore tell me, most fair Katharine, will you have me?

Put off your maiden blushes; avouch the thoughts of your heart with the

looks of an empress; take me by the hand, and say, Harry of England, 

am thine; which word thou shalt no sooner bless mine ear withal, but 

will tell thee aloud, England is thine, Ireland is thine, France is

thine, and Henry Plantagenet is thine; who, though  speak it before

his face, if he be not fellow with the best king, thou shalt find the

best king of good fellows. Come, your answer in broken music; for thy

voice is music and thy English broken; therefore, queen of all,

Katharine, break thy mind to me in broken English. Wilt thou have me?


Dat is as it shall please _le roi mon père_.


Nay, it will please him well, Kate; it shall please him, Kate.


Den it sall also content me.


Upon that  kiss your hand, and call you my queen.


_Laissez, mon seigneur, laissez, laissez! Ma foi, je ne veux point que

vous abaissiez votre grandeur en baisant la main d’une—Notre

Seigneur!—indigne serviteur. Excusez-moi, je vous supplie, mon

très-puissant seigneur._


Then  will kiss your lips, Kate.


_Les dames et demoiselles pour être baisées devant leurs noces, il

n’est pas la coutume de France._


Madame my interpreter, what says she?


Dat it is not be de fashion _pour les_ ladies of France,— cannot tell

wat is _baiser en_ Anglish.


To kiss.


Your Majestee _entend_ bettre _que moi_.


It is not a fashion for the maids in France to kiss before they are

married, would she say?


_Oui, vraiment._


Kate, nice customs curtsy to great kings. Dear Kate, you and  cannot

be confined within the weak list of a country’s fashion. We are the

makers of manners, Kate; and the liberty that follows our places stops

the mouth of all find-faults, as  will do yours, for upholding the

nice fashion of your country in denying me a kiss; therefore, patiently

and yielding.  You have witchcraft in your lips, Kate;

there is more eloquence in a sugar touch of them than in the tongues of

the French council; and they should sooner persuade Harry of England

than a general petition of monarchs. Here comes your father.



God save your Majesty! My royal cousin, teach you our princess English?


would have her learn, my fair cousin, how perfectly  love her; and

that is good English.


Is she not apt?


Our tongue is rough, coz, and my condition is not smooth; so that,

having neither the voice nor the heart of flattery about me,  cannot

so conjure up the spirit of love in her, that he will appear in his

true likeness.


Pardon the frankness of my mirth, if  answer you for that. If you

would conjure in her, you must make a circle; if conjure up Love in he
in his true likeness, he must appear naked and blind. Can you blame he
then, being a maid yet ros’d over with the virgin crimson of modesty,

if she deny the appearance of a naked blind boy in her naked seeing

self? It were, my lord, a hard condition for a maid to consign to.


Yet they do wink and yield, as love is blind and enforces.


They are then excus’d, my lord, when they see not what they do.


Then, good my lord, teach your cousin to consent winking.


will wink on her to consent, my lord, if you will teach her to know

my meaning; for maids, well summer’d and warm kept, are like flies at

Bartholomew-tide, blind, though they have their eyes; and then they

will endure handling, which before would not abide looking on.


This moral ties me over to time and a hot summer; and so  shall catch

the fly, your cousin, in the latter end, and she must be blind too.


As love is, my lord, before it loves.


It is so; and you may, some of you, thank love for my blindness, who

cannot see many a fair French city for one fair French maid that stands

in my way.


Yes, my lord, you see them perspectively, the cities turn’d into a

maid; for they are all girdled with maiden walls that no war hath

entered.


Shall Kate be my wife?


So please you.


am content, so the maiden cities you talk of may wait on her; so the

maid that stood in the way for my wish shall show me the way to my

will.


We have consented to all terms of reason.


Is’t so, my lords of England?


The king hath granted every article;

His daughter first, and then in sequel all,

According to their firm proposed natures.


Only he hath not yet subscribed this: where your Majesty demands, that

the King of France, having any occasion to write for matter of grant,

shall name your Highness in this form and with this addition, in

French, _Notre très-cher fils Henri, Roi d’Angleterre, Héritier de

France_; and thus in Latin, _Praeclarissimus filius noster Henricus,

rex Angliae et haeres Franciae._


Nor this  have not, brother, so denied

But our request shall make me let it pass.


pray you then, in love and dear alliance,

Let that one article rank with the rest;

And thereupon give me your daughter.


Take her, fair son, and from her blood raise up

Issue to me; that the contending kingdoms

Of France and England, whose very shores look pale

With envy of each other’s happiness,

May cease their hatred; and this dear conjunction

Plant neighbourhood and Christian-like accord

In their sweet bosoms, that never war advance

His bleeding sword ’twixt England and fair France.


Amen!


Now, welcome, Kate; and bear me witness all,

That here  kiss her as my sovereign queen.



God, the best maker of all marriages,

Combine your hearts in one, your realms in one!

As man and wife, being two, are one in love,

So be there ’twixt your kingdoms such a spousal,

That never may ill office, or fell jealousy,

Which troubles oft the bed of blessed marriage,

Thrust in between the paction of these kingdoms,

To make divorce of their incorporate league;

That English may as French, French Englishmen,

Receive each other. God speak this Amen!


Amen!


Prepare we for our marriage; on which day,

My Lord of Burgundy, we’ll take your oath,

And all the peers’, for surety of our leagues,

Then shall  swear to Kate, and you to me;

And may our oaths well kept and prosperous be!





Thus far, with rough and all-unable pen,

Our bending author hath pursu’d the story,

In little room confining mighty men,

Mangling by starts the full course of their glory.

Small time, but in that small most greatly lived

This star of England. Fortune made his sword,

By which the world’s best garden he achieved,

And of it left his son imperial lord.

Henry the Sixth, in infant bands crown’d King

Of France and England, did this king succeed;

Whose state so many had the managing,

That they lost France and made his England bleed:

Which oft our stage hath shown; and, for their sake,

In your fair minds let this acceptance take.


***             ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will

be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by .. copyright

law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,

so the Foundation  can copy and distribute it in the

United States without permission and without paying copyright

royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part

of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project

Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the  -tm

concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,

and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following

the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use

of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything fo
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very

easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation

of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project

Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may

do practically  in the United States with eBooks not protected

by .. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark

license, especially commercial redistribution.

:  



To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free

distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work

(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project

Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full

Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at

www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section . General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project

Gutenberg-tm electronic works

.. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm

electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to

and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property

agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all

the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return o
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in you
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a

Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound

by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the

person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph

...

.. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be

used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who

agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few

things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See

paragraph . below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project

Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this

agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm

electronic works. See paragraph . below.

.. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the

Foundation" or ), owns a compilation copyright in the collection

of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual

works in the collection are in the public domain in the United

States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the

United States and you are located in the United States, we do not

claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,

displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as

all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope

that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting

free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm

works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the

Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily

comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the

same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when

you share it without charge with others.

.. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern

what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are

in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,

check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this

agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,

distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any

other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no

representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any

country other than the United States.

.. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

... The following sentence, with active links to, or othe
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appea
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work

on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the

phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,

performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and

most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no

restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it

under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this

eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the

United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where

you are located before using this eBook.

... If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is

derived from texts not protected by .. copyright law (does not

contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the

copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in

the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are

redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project

Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply

either with the requirements of paragraphs .. through .. o
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm

trademark as set forth in paragraphs .. or ...

... If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted

with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution

must comply with both paragraphs .. through .. and any

additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms

will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works

posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the

beginning of this work.

... Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm

License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this

work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

... Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this

electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without

prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph .. with

active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project

Gutenberg-tm License.

... You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,

compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including

any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access

to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format

other than "Plain Vanilla " or other format used in the official

version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website

, you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense

to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means

of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain

Vanilla " or other form. Any alternate format must include the

full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph ...

... Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,

performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works

unless you comply with paragraph .. or ...

... You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing

access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from

the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method

you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed

to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has

agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project

Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid

within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are

legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty

payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project

Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in

Section , "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg

Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies

you in writing  within 30 days of receipt that s/he

does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm

License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all

copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue

all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm

works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph .., a full refund of

any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the

electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of

receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free

distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

... If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project

Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than

are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing

from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of

the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set

forth in Section  below.

..

... Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable

effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread

works not protected by .. copyright law in creating the Project

Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm

electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may

contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate

or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or othe
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk o
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage o
cannot be read by your equipment.

...  ,    - Except for the "Right

of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph .., the Project

Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project

Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project

Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all

liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal

fees.         , 

,         

...     , 

,         

, , , ,  



...       - If you discover a

defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can

receive a refund of the money  you paid for it by sending a

written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you

received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium

with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you

with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in

lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person

or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second

opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If

the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing

without further opportunities to fix the problem.

... Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth

in paragraph .., this work is provided to you '-',  

,   ,   


... Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied

warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of

damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement

violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the

agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer o
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity o
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the

remaining provisions.

...  - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the

trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone

providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in

accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the

production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm

electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,

including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of

the following which you do or cause to occur:  distribution of this

or any Project Gutenberg-tm work,  alteration, modification, o
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and  any

Defect you cause.

Section . Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of

electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of

computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It

exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations

from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the

assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's

goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will

remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project

Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure

and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future

generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary

Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see

Sections  and  and the Foundation information page at

www.gutenberg.org

Section . Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary

Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit

501() educational corporation organized under the laws of the

state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal

Revenue Service. The Foundation's  or federal tax identification

number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary

Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by

.. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,

Salt Lake City,  84116,  596-1887. Email contact links and up

to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website

and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section . Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg

Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without

widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of

increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be

freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest

array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations

are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt

status with the 

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating

charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United

States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a

considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up

with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations

where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To 

or determine the status of compliance for any particula
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we

have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition

against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who

approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make

any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from

outside the United States. .. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation

methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of othe
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To

donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section . General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael . Hart was the originator of the Project

Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be

freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and

distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of

volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed

editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in

the .. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not

necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular pape
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main  search

facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,

including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary

Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to

subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
