                          :

London; Westminster; Kimbolton



come no more to make you laugh; things now

That bear a weighty and a serious brow,

Sad, high, and working, full of state and woe,

Such noble scenes as draw the eye to flow,

We now present. Those that can pity here

May, if they think it well, let fall a tear:

The subject will deserve it. Such as give

Their money out of hope they may believe

May here find truth too. Those that come to see

Only a show or two, and so agree

The play may pass, if they be still and willing,

'll undertake may see away their shilling

Richly in two short hours. Only they

That come to hear a merry bawdy play,

noise of targets, or to see a fellow

In a long motley coat guarded with yellow,

Will be deceiv'd; for, gentle hearers, know,

To rank our chosen truth with such a show

As fool and fight is, beside forfeiting

Our own brains, and the opinion that we bring

To make that only true we now intend,

Will leave us never an understanding friend.

Therefore, for goodness sake, and as you are known

The first and happiest hearers of the town,

Be sad, as we would make ye. Think ye see

The very persons of our noble story

As they were living; think you see them great,

And follow'd with the general throng and sweat

Of thousand friends; then, in a moment, see

How soon this mightiness meets misery.

And if you can be merry then, 'll say

man may weep upon his wedding-day.

.  .

London. The palace


the    and the  

Good morrow, and well met. How have ye done

Since last we saw in France?

thank your Grace,

Healthful; and ever since a fresh admire
Of what  saw there.

An untimely ague

Stay'd me a prisoner in my chamber when

Those suns of glory, those two lights of men,

Met in the vale of Andren.

'Twixt Guynes and Arde--

was then present, saw them salute on horseback;

Beheld them, when they lighted, how they clung

In their embracement, as they grew together;

Which had they, what four thron'd ones could have weigh'd

Such a compounded one?

All the whole time

was my chamber's prisoner.

Then you lost

The view of earthly glory; men might say,

Till this time pomp was single, but now married

To one above itself. Each following day

Became the next day's master, till the last

Made former wonders its. To-day the French,

All clinquant, all in gold, like heathen gods,

Shone down the English; and to-morrow they

Made Britain India: every man that stood

Show'd like a mine. Their dwarfish pages were

As cherubins, all gilt; the madams too,

Not us'd to toil, did almost sweat to bea
The pride upon them, that their very labou
Was to them as a painting. Now this masque

Was cried incomparable; and th' ensuing night

Made it a fool and beggar. The two kings,

Equal in lustre, were now best, now worst,

As presence did present them: him in eye

Still him in praise; and being present both,

'Twas said they saw but one, and no discerne
Durst wag his tongue in censure. When these suns--

For so they phrase 'em--by their heralds challeng'd

The noble spirits to arms, they did perform

Beyond thought's compass, that former fabulous story,

Being now seen possible enough, got credit,

That Bevis was believ'd.

, you go far!

As  belong to worship, and affect

In honour honesty, the tract of ev'rything

Would by a good discourser lose some life

Which action's self was tongue to. All was royal:

To the disposing of it nought rebell'd;

Order gave each thing view. The office did

Distinctly his full function.

Who did guide--

mean, who set the body and the limbs

Of this great sport together, as you guess?

One, certes, that promises no element

In such a business.

pray you, who, my lord?

All this was ord'red by the good discretion

Of the right reverend Cardinal of York.

The devil speed him! No man's pie is freed

From his ambitious finger. What had he

To do in these fierce vanities?  wonde
That such a keech can with his very bulk

Take up the rays o' th' beneficial sun,

And keep it from the earth.

Surely, sir,

There's in him stuff that puts him to these ends;

For, being not propp'd by ancestry, whose grace

Chalks successors their way, nor call'd upon

For high feats done to th' crown, neither allied

To eminent assistants, but spider-like,

Out of his self-drawing web, 'a gives us note

The force of his own merit makes his way--

gift that heaven gives for him, which buys

place next to the King.

cannot tell

What heaven hath given him--let some graver eye

Pierce into that; but  can see his pride

Peep through each part of him. Whence has he that?

If not from hell, the devil is a niggard

Or has given all before, and he begins

new hell in himself.

Why the devil,

Upon this French going out, took he upon him--

Without the privity o' th' King--t' appoint

Who should attend on him? He makes up the file

Of all the gentry; for the most part such

To whom as great a charge as little honou
He meant to lay upon; and his own letter,

The honourable board of council out,

Must fetch him in he papers.

do know

Kinsmen of mine, three at the least, that have

By this so sicken'd their estates that neve
They shall abound as formerly.

, many

Have broke their backs with laying manors on 'em

For this great journey. What did this vanity

But minister communication of

most poor issue?

Grievingly  think

The peace between the French and us not values

The cost that did conclude it.

Every man,

After the hideous storm that follow'd, was

thing inspir'd, and, not consulting, broke

Into a general prophecy--that this tempest,

Dashing the garment of this peace, aboded

The sudden breach on't.

Which is budded out;

For France hath flaw'd the league, and hath attach'd

Our merchants' goods at Bordeaux.

Is it therefore

Th' ambassador is silenc'd?

Marry, is't.

proper tide of a peace, and purchas'd

At a superfluous rate!

Why, all this business

Our reverend Cardinal carried.

Like it your Grace,

The state takes notice of the private difference

Betwixt you and the Cardinal.  advise you--

And take it from a heart that wishes towards you

Honour and plenteous safety--that you read

The Cardinal's malice and his potency

Together; to consider further, that

What his high hatred would effect wants not

minister in his power. You know his nature,

That he's revengeful; and  know his sword

Hath a sharp edge--it's long and 't may be said

It reaches far, and where 'twill not extend,

Thither he darts it. Bosom up my counsel

You'll find it wholesome. Lo, where comes that rock

That  advise your shunning.


him, certain of the guard, and two 

with papers. The  in his passage fixeth his

eye on , and  on him,

both full of disdain.

The Duke of Buckingham's surveyor? Ha!

Where's his examination?

Here, so please you.

Is he in person ready?

Ay, please your Grace.

Well, we shall then know more, and Buckingham

shall lessen this big look.

Exeunt  and his

train

This butcher's cur is venom-mouth'd, and 

Have not the power to muzzle him; therefore best

Not wake him in his slumber.  beggar's book

Outworths a noble's blood.

What, are you chaf'd?

Ask God for temp'rance; that's th' appliance only

Which your disease requires.

read in 's looks

Matter against me, and his eye revil'd

Me as his abject object. At this instant

He bores me with some trick. He's gone to th' King;

'll follow, and outstare him.

Stay, my lord,

And let your reason with your choler question

What 'tis you go about. To climb steep hills

Requires slow pace at first. Anger is like

full hot horse, who being allow'd his way,

Self-mettle tires him. Not a man in England

Can advise me like you; be to yourself

As you would to your friend.

'll to the King,

And from a mouth of honour quite cry down

This Ipswich fellow's insolence; or proclaim

There's difference in no persons.

Be advis'd:

Heat not a furnace for your foe so hot

That it do singe yourself. We may outrun

By violent swiftness that which we run at,

And lose by over-running. Know you not

The fire that mounts the liquor till 't run o'e
In seeming to augment it wastes it? Be advis'd.

say again there is no English soul

More stronger to direct you than yourself,

If with the sap of reason you would quench

Or but allay the fire of passion.

Sir,

am thankful to you, and 'll go along

By your prescription; but this top-proud fellow--

Whom from the flow of gall  name not, but

From sincere motions, by intelligence,

And proofs as clear as founts in July when

We see each grain of gravel-- do know

To be corrupt and treasonous.

Say not treasonous.

To th' King 'll say't, and make my vouch as strong

As shore of rock. Attend: this holy fox,

Or wolf, or both--for he is equal rav'nous

As he is subtle, and as prone to mischief

As able to perform't, his mind and place

Infecting one another, yea, reciprocally--

Only to show his pomp as well in France

As here at home, suggests the King our maste
To this last costly treaty, th' interview

That swallowed so much treasure and like a glass

Did break i' th' wrenching.

Faith, and so it did.

Pray, give me favour, sir; this cunning cardinal

The articles o' th' combination drew

As himself pleas'd; and they were ratified

As he cried 'Thus let be' to as much end

As give a crutch to th' dead. But our Count-Cardinal

Has done this, and 'tis well; for worthy Wolsey,

Who cannot err, he did it. Now this follows,

Which, as  take it, is a kind of puppy

To th' old dam treason: Charles the Emperor,

Under pretence to see the Queen his aunt--

For 'twas indeed his colour, but he came

To whisper Wolsey--here makes visitation--

His fears were that the interview betwixt

England and France might through their amity

Breed him some prejudice; for from this league

Peep'd harms that menac'd him--privily

Deals with our Cardinal; and, as  trow--

Which  do well, for  am sure the Empero
Paid ere he promis'd; whereby his suit was granted

Ere it was ask'd--but when the way was made,

And pav'd with gold, the Emperor thus desir'd,

That he would please to alter the King's course,

And break the foresaid peace. Let the King know,

As soon he shall by me, that thus the Cardinal

Does buy and sell his honour as he pleases,

And for his own advantage.

am sorry

To hear this of him, and could wish he were

Something mistaken in't.

No, not a syllable:

do pronounce him in that very shape

He shall appear in proof.


and two or three of the guard

Your office, sergeant: execute it.

Sir,

My lord the Duke of Buckingham, and Earl

Of Hereford, Stafford, and Northampton, 

Arrest thee of high treason, in the name

Of our most sovereign King.

Lo you, my lord,

The net has fall'n upon me!  shall perish

Under device and practice.

am sorry

To see you ta'en from liberty, to look on

The business present; 'tis his Highness' pleasure

You shall to th' Tower.

It will help nothing

To plead mine innocence; for that dye is on me

Which makes my whit'st part black. The will of heav'n

Be done in this and all things!  obey.

my Lord Aberga'ny, fare you well!

Nay, he must bear you company.

The King

Is pleas'd you shall to th' Tower, till you know

How he determines further.

As the Duke said,

The will of heaven be done, and the King's pleasure

By me obey'd.

Here is warrant from

The King t' attach Lord Montacute and the bodies

Of the Duke's confessor, John de la Car,

One Gilbert Peck, his chancellor--

So, so!

These are the limbs o' th' plot; no more,  hope.

monk o' th' Chartreux.

, Nicholas Hopkins?

He.

My surveyor is false. The o'er-great Cardinal

Hath show'd him gold; my life is spann'd already.

am the shadow of poor Buckingham,

Whose figure even this instant cloud puts on

By dark'ning my clear sun. My lord, farewell.

Exeunt

.  .

London. The Council Chambe

the , and   , with others. The 

places himself under the ' feet on his right side

My life itself, and the best heart of it,

Thanks you for this great care;  stood i' th' level

Of a full-charg'd confederacy, and give thanks

To you that chok'd it. Let be call'd before us

That gentleman of Buckingham's. In person

'll hear his confessions justify;

And point by point the treasons of his maste
He shall again relate.

noise within, crying 'Room for the Queen!'


and ; she kneels. The  riseth

from his state, takes her up, kisses and placeth he
by him.

Nay, we must longer kneel:  am suitor.

Arise, and take place by us. Half your suit

Never name to us: you have half our power.

The other moiety ere you ask is given;

Repeat your will, and take it.

Thank your Majesty.

That you would love yourself, and in that love

Not unconsidered leave your honour no
The dignity of your office, is the point

Of my petition.

Lady mine, proceed.

am solicited, not by a few,

And those of true condition, that your subjects

Are in great grievance: there have been commissions

Sent down among 'em which hath flaw'd the heart

Of all their loyalties; wherein, although,

My good Lord Cardinal, they vent reproaches

Most bitterly on you as putter-on

Of these exactions, yet the King our master--

Whose honour Heaven shield from soil!--even he escapes not

Language unmannerly; yea, such which breaks

The sides of loyalty, and almost appears

In loud rebellion.

Not almost appears--

It doth appear; for, upon these taxations,

The clothiers all, not able to maintain

The many to them 'longing, have put off

The spinsters, carders, fullers, weavers, who

Unfit for other life, compell'd by hunge
And lack of other means, in desperate manne
Daring th' event to th' teeth, are all in uproar,

And danger serves among them.

Taxation!

Wherein? and what taxation? My Lord Cardinal,

You that are blam'd for it alike with us,

Know you of this taxation?

Please you, sir,

know but of a single part in aught

Pertains to th' state, and front but in that file

Where others tell steps with me.

No, my lord!

You know no more than others! But you frame

Things that are known alike, which are not wholesome

To those which would not know them, and yet must

Perforce be their acquaintance. These exactions,

Whereof my sovereign would have note, they are

Most pestilent to th' hearing; and to bear 'em

The back is sacrifice to th' load. They say

They are devis'd by you, or else you suffe
Too hard an exclamation.

Still exaction!

The nature of it? In what kind, let's know,

Is this exaction?

am much too venturous

In tempting of your patience, but am bold'ned

Under your promis'd pardon. The subjects' grief

Comes through commissions, which compels from each

The sixth part of his substance, to be levied

Without delay; and the pretence for this

Is nam'd your wars in France. This makes bold mouths;

Tongues spit their duties out, and cold hearts freeze

Allegiance in them; their curses now

Live where their prayers did; and it's come to pass

This tractable obedience is a slave

To each incensed will.  would your Highness

Would give it quick consideration, fo
There is no primer business.

By my life,

This is against our pleasure.

And for me,

have no further gone in this than by

single voice; and that not pass'd me but

By learned approbation of the judges. If  am

Traduc'd by ignorant tongues, which neither know

My faculties nor person, yet will be

The chronicles of my doing, let me say

'Tis but the fate of place, and the rough brake

That virtue must go through. We must not stint

Our necessary actions in the fea
To cope malicious censurers, which eve
As rav'nous fishes do a vessel follow

That is new-trimm'd, but benefit no furthe
Than vainly longing. What we oft do best,

By sick interpreters, once weak ones, is

Not ours, or not allow'd; what worst, as oft

Hitting a grosser quality, is cried up

For our best act. If we shall stand still,

In fear our motion will be mock'd or carp'd at,

We should take root here where we sit, or sit

State-statues only.

Things done well

And with a care exempt themselves from fear:

Things done without example, in their issue

Are to be fear'd. Have you a precedent

Of this commission?  believe, not any.

We must not rend our subjects from our laws,

And stick them in our will. Sixth part of each?

trembling contribution! Why, we take

From every tree lop, bark, and part o' th' timber;

And though we leave it with a root, thus hack'd,

The air will drink the sap. To every county

Where this is question'd send our letters with

Free pardon to each man that has denied

The force of this commission. Pray, look to't;

put it to your care.

word with you.

Let there be letters writ to every shire

Of the King's grace and pardon. The grieved commons

Hardly conceive of me--let it be nois'd

That through our intercession this revokement

And pardon comes.  shall anon advise you

Further in the proceeding.



am sorry that the Duke of Buckingham

Is run in your displeasure.

It grieves many.

The gentleman is learn'd and a most rare speaker;

To nature none more bound; his training such

That he may furnish and instruct great teachers

And never seek for aid out of himself. Yet see,

When these so noble benefits shall prove

Not well dispos'd, the mind growing once corrupt,

They turn to vicious forms, ten times more ugly

Than ever they were fair. This man so complete,

Who was enroll'd 'mongst wonders, and when we,

Almost with ravish'd list'ning, could not find

His hour of speech a minute--he, my lady,

Hath into monstrous habits put the graces

That once were his, and is become as black

As if besmear'd in hell. Sit by us; you shall hear--

This was his gentleman in trust--of him

Things to strike honour sad. Bid him recount

The fore-recited practices, whereof

We cannot feel too little, hear too much.

Stand forth, and with bold spirit relate what you,

Most like a careful subject, have collected

Out of the Duke of Buckingham.

Speak freely.

First, it was usual with him--every day

It would infect his speech--that if the King

Should without issue die, he'll carry it so

To make the sceptre his. These very words

've heard him utter to his son-in-law,

Lord Aberga'ny, to whom by oath he menac'd

Revenge upon the Cardinal.

Please your Highness, note

This dangerous conception in this point:

Not friended by his wish, to your high person

His will is most malignant, and it stretches

Beyond you to your friends.

My learn'd Lord Cardinal,

Deliver all with charity.

Speak on.

How grounded he his title to the crown

Upon our fail? To this point hast thou heard him

At any time speak aught?

He was brought to this

By a vain prophecy of Nicholas Henton.

What was that Henton?

Sir, a Chartreux friar,

His confessor, who fed him every minute

With words of sovereignty.

How know'st thou this?

Not long before your Highness sped to France,

The Duke being at the Rose, within the parish

Saint Lawrence Poultney, did of me demand

What was the speech among the Londoners

Concerning the French journey.  replied

Men fear'd the French would prove perfidious,

To the King's danger. Presently the Duke

Said 'twas the fear indeed and that he doubted

'Twould prove the verity of certain words

Spoke by a holy monk 'that oft' says he

'Hath sent to me, wishing me to permit

John de la Car, my chaplain, a choice hou
To hear from him a matter of some moment;

Whom after under the confession's seal

He solemnly had sworn that what he spoke

My chaplain to no creature living but

To me should utter, with demure confidence

This pausingly ensu'd: "Neither the King nor's heirs,

Tell you the Duke, shall prosper; bid him strive

To gain the love o' th' commonalty; the Duke

Shall govern England."'

If  know you well,

You were the Duke's surveyor, and lost your office

On the complaint o' th' tenants. Take good heed

You charge not in your spleen a noble person

And spoil your nobler soul.  say, take heed;

Yes, heartily beseech you.

Let him on.

Go forward.

On my soul, 'll speak but truth.

told my lord the Duke, by th' devil's illusions

The monk might be deceiv'd, and that 'twas dangerous

for him

To ruminate on this so far, until

It forg'd him some design, which, being believ'd,

It was much like to do. He answer'd 'Tush,

It can do me no damage'; adding furthe
That, had the King in his last sickness fail'd,

The Cardinal's and Sir Thomas Lovell's heads

Should have gone off.

Ha! what, so rank? Ah ha!

There's mischief in this man. Canst thou say further?

can, my liege.

Proceed.

Being at Greenwich,

After your Highness had reprov'd the Duke

About Sir William Bulmer--

remembe
Of such a time: being my sworn servant,

The Duke retain'd him his. But on: what hence?

'If' quoth he ' for this had been committed--

As to the Tower  thought-- would have play'd

The part my father meant to act upon

Th' usurper Richard; who, being at Salisbury,

Made suit to come in's presence, which if granted,

As he made semblance of his duty, would

Have put his knife into him.'

giant traitor!

Now, madam, may his Highness live in freedom,

And this man out of prison?

God mend all!

There's something more would out of thee: what say'st?

After 'the Duke his father' with the 'knife,'

He stretch'd him, and, with one hand on his dagger,

Another spread on's breast, mounting his eyes,

He did discharge a horrible oath, whose tenou
Was, were he evil us'd, he would outgo

His father by as much as a performance

Does an irresolute purpose.

There's his period,

To sheath his knife in us. He is attach'd;

Call him to present trial. If he may

Find mercy in the law, 'tis his; if none,

Let him not seek't of us. By day and night!

He's traitor to th' height.

Exeunt

.  .

London. The palace


Is't possible the spells of France should juggle

Men into such strange mysteries?

New customs,

Though they be never so ridiculous,

Nay, let 'em be unmanly, yet are follow'd.

As far as  see, all the good our English

Have got by the late voyage is but merely

fit or two o' th' face; but they are shrewd ones;

For when they hold 'em, you would swear directly

Their very noses had been counsellors

To Pepin or Clotharius, they keep state so.

They have all new legs, and lame ones. One

would take it,

That never saw 'em pace before, the spavin

Or springhalt reign'd among 'em.

Death! my lord,

Their clothes are after such a pagan cut to't,

That sure th' have worn out Christendom.


How now?

What news, Sir Thomas Lovell?

Faith, my lord,

hear of none but the new proclamation

That's clapp'd upon the court gate.

What is't for?

The reformation of our travell'd gallants,

That fill the court with quarrels, talk, and tailors.

am glad 'tis there. Now  would pray ou
monsieurs

To think an English courtier may be wise,

And never see the Louvre.

They must either,

For so run the conditions, leave those remnants

Of fool and feather that they got in France,

With all their honourable points of ignorance

Pertaining thereunto--as fights and fireworks;

Abusing better men than they can be,

Out of a foreign wisdom--renouncing clean

The faith they have in tennis, and tall stockings,

Short blist'red breeches, and those types of travel

And understand again like honest men,

Or pack to their old playfellows. There,  take it,

They may, cum privilegio, wear away

The lag end of their lewdness and be laugh'd at.

'Tis time to give 'em physic, their diseases

Are grown so catching.

What a loss our ladies

Will have of these trim vanities!

Ay, marry,

There will be woe indeed, lords: the sly whoresons

Have got a speeding trick to lay down ladies.

French song and a fiddle has no fellow.

The devil fiddle 'em!  am glad they are going,

For sure there's no converting 'em. Now

An honest country lord, as  am, beaten

long time out of play, may bring his plainsong

And have an hour of hearing; and, by'r Lady,

Held current music too.

Well said, Lord Sandys;

Your colt's tooth is not cast yet.

No, my lord,

Nor shall not while  have a stamp.

Sir Thomas,

Whither were you a-going?

To the Cardinal's;

Your lordship is a guest too.

, 'tis true;

This night he makes a supper, and a great one,

To many lords and ladies; there will be

The beauty of this kingdom, 'll assure you.

That churchman bears a bounteous mind indeed,

hand as fruitful as the land that feeds us;

His dews fall everywhere.

No doubt he's noble;

He had a black mouth that said other of him.

He may, my lord; has wherewithal. In him

Sparing would show a worse sin than ill doctrine:

Men of his way should be most liberal,

They are set here for examples.

True, they are so;

But few now give so great ones. My barge stays;

Your lordship shall along. Come, good Sir Thomas,

We shall be late else; which  would not be,

For  was spoke to, with Sir Henry Guildford,

This night to be comptrollers.

am your lordship's.

Exeunt

.  .

London. The Presence Chamber in York Place

Hautboys.  small table under a state for the Cardinal,

a longer table for the guests. Then enter  ,

and divers other  and , as guests, at one door;

at another door ente
Ladies, a general welcome from his Grace

Salutes ye all; this night he dedicates

To fair content and you. None here, he hopes,

In all this noble bevy, has brought with he
One care abroad; he would have all as merry

As, first, good company, good wine, good welcome,

Can make good people.



, my lord, y'are tardy,

The very thought of this fair company

Clapp'd wings to me.

You are young, Sir Harry Guildford.

Sir Thomas Lovell, had the Cardinal

But half my lay thoughts in him, some of these

Should find a running banquet ere they rested

think would better please 'em. By my life,

They are a sweet society of fair ones.

that your lordship were but now confesso
To one or two of these!

would  were;

They should find easy penance.

Faith, how easy?

As easy as a down bed would afford it.

Sweet ladies, will it please you sit? Sir Harry,

Place you that side; 'll take the charge of this.

His Grace is ent'ring. Nay, you must not freeze:

Two women plac'd together makes cold weather.

My Lord Sandys, you are one will keep 'em waking:

Pray sit between these ladies.

By my faith,

And thank your lordship. By your leave, sweet ladies.

[Seats himself between   and anothe
lady]

If  chance to talk a little wild, forgive me;

had it from my father.

Was he mad, sir?

, very mad, exceeding mad, in love too.

But he would bite none; just as  do now,

He would kiss you twenty with a breath.              [Kisses

her]

Well said, my lord.

So, now y'are fairly seated. Gentlemen,

The penance lies on you if these fair ladies

Pass away frowning.

For my little cure,

Let me alone.


takes his state

'are welcome, my fair guests. That noble lady

Or gentleman that is not freely merry

Is not my friend. This, to confirm my welcome--

And to you all, good health!


Your Grace is noble.

Let me have such a bowl may hold my thanks

And save me so much talking.

My Lord Sandys,

am beholding to you. Cheer your neighbours.

Ladies, you are not merry. Gentlemen,

Whose fault is this?

The red wine first must rise

In their fair cheeks, my lord; then we shall have 'em

Talk us to silence.

You are a merry gamester,

My Lord Sandys.

Yes, if  make my play.

Here's to your ladyship; and pledge it, madam,

For 'tis to such a thing--

You cannot show me.

told your Grace they would talk anon.


What's that?

Look out there, some of ye.


What warlike voice,

And to what end, is this? Nay, ladies, fear not:

By all the laws of war y'are privileg'd.

Re-ente
How now! what is't?

noble troop of strangers--

For so they seem. Th' have left their barge and landed,

And hither make, as great ambassadors

From foreign princes.

Good Lord Chamberlain,

Go, give 'em welcome; you can speak the French tongue;

And pray receive 'em nobly and conduct 'em

Into our presence, where this heaven of beauty

Shall shine at full upon them. Some attend him.


remov'd

You have now a broken banquet, but we'll mend it.

good digestion to you all; and once more

show'r a welcome on ye; welcome all.


habited like shepherds, usher'd by the  

They pass directly before the ,

and gracefully salute him

noble company! What are their pleasures?

Because they speak no English, thus they pray'd

To tell your Grace, that, having heard by fame

Of this so noble and so fair assembly

This night to meet here, they could do no less,

Out of the great respect they bear to beauty,

But leave their flocks and, under your fair conduct,

Crave leave to view these ladies and entreat

An hour of revels with 'em.

Say, Lord Chamberlain,

They have done my poor house grace; for which  pay 'em

thousand thanks, and pray 'em take their pleasures.

[They choose ladies. The  chooses 

]

The fairest hand  ever touch'd!  beauty,

Till now  never knew thee!


My lord!

Your Grace?

Pray tell 'em thus much from me:

There should be one amongst 'em, by his person,

More worthy this place than myself; to whom,

If  but knew him, with my love and duty

would surrender it.

will, my lord.


What say they?

Such a one, they all confess,

There is indeed; which they would have your Grace

Find out, and he will take it.

Let me see, then.                    [Comes from his

state]

By all your good leaves, gentlemen, here 'll make

My royal choice.

Ye have found him, Cardinal.

You hold a fair assembly; you do well, lord.

You are a churchman, or, 'll tell you, Cardinal,

should judge now unhappily.

am glad

Your Grace is grown so pleasant.

My Lord Chamberlain,

Prithee come hither: what fair lady's that?

An't please your Grace, Sir Thomas Bullen's

daughter--

The Viscount Rochford--one of her Highness' women.

By heaven, she is a dainty one. Sweet heart,

were unmannerly to take you out

And not to kiss you.  health, gentlemen!

Let it go round.

Sir Thomas Lovell, is the banquet ready

' th' privy chamber?

Yes, my lord.

Your Grace,

fear, with dancing is a little heated.

fear, too much.

There's fresher air, my lord,

In the next chamber.

Lead in your ladies, ev'ry one. Sweet partner,

must not yet forsake you. Let's be merry:

Good my Lord Cardinal,  have half a dozen healths

To drink to these fair ladies, and a measure

To lead 'em once again; and then let's dream

Who's best in favour. Let the music knock it.

Exeunt, with trumpets

<<        

1990-1993   , ,  



()     

,  ()     


>>

.

Westminster.  street


Whither away so fast?

, God save ye!

Ev'n to the Hall, to hear what shall become

Of the great Duke of Buckingham.

'll save you

That labour, sir. All's now done but the ceremony

Of bringing back the prisoner.

Were you there?

Yes, indeed, was .

Pray, speak what has happen'd.

You may guess quickly what.

Is he found guilty?

Yes, truly is he, and condemn'd upon't.

am sorry for't.

So are a number more.

But, pray, how pass'd it?

'll tell you in a little. The great Duke.

Came to the bar; where to his accusations

He pleaded still not guilty, and alleged

Many sharp reasons to defeat the law.

The King's attorney, on the contrary,

Urg'd on the examinations, proofs, confessions,

Of divers witnesses; which the Duke desir'd

To have brought, viva voce, to his face;

At which appear'd against him his surveyor,

Sir Gilbert Peck his chancellor, and John Car,

Confessor to him, with that devil-monk,

Hopkins, that made this mischief.

That was he

That fed him with his prophecies?

The same.

All these accus'd him strongly, which he fain

Would have flung from him; but indeed he could not;

And so his peers, upon this evidence,

Have found him guilty of high treason. Much

He spoke, and learnedly, for life; but all

Was either pitied in him or forgotten.

After all this, how did he bear him-self

When he was brought again to th' bar to hea
His knell rung out, his judgment, he was stirr'd

With such an agony he sweat extremely,

And something spoke in choler, ill and hasty;

But he fell to himself again, and sweetly

In all the rest show'd a most noble patience.

do not think he fears death.

Sure, he does not;

He never was so womanish; the cause

He may a little grieve at.

Certainly

The Cardinal is the end of this.

'Tis likely,

By all conjectures: first, Kildare's attainder,

Then deputy of Ireland, who remov'd,

Earl Surrey was sent thither, and in haste too,

Lest he should help his father.

That trick of state

Was a deep envious one.

At his return

No doubt he will requite it. This is noted,

And generally: whoever the King favours

The Cardinal instantly will find employment,

And far enough from court too.

All the commons

Hate him perniciously, and, o' my conscience,

Wish him ten fathom deep: this Duke as much

They love and dote on; call him bounteous Buckingham,

The mirror of all courtesy--


before him; the axe with the edge towards him; halberds

on each side; accompanied with  

,   ,   ,

and common people, etc.

Stay there, sir,

And see the noble ruin'd man you speak of.

Let's stand close, and behold him.

All good people,

You that thus far have come to pity me,

Hear what  say, and then go home and lose me.

have this day receiv'd a traitor's judgment,

And by that name must die; yet, heaven bear witness,

And if  have a conscience, let it sink me

Even as the axe falls, if  be not faithful!

The law  bear no malice for my death:

' has done, upon the premises, but justice.

But those that sought it  could wish more Christians.

Be what they will,  heartily forgive 'em;

Yet let 'em look they glory not in mischief

Nor build their evils on the graves of great men,

For then my guiltless blood must cry against 'em.

For further life in this world  ne'er hope

Nor will  sue, although the King have mercies

More than  dare make faults. You few that lov'd me

And dare be bold to weep for Buckingham,

His noble friends and fellows, whom to leave

Is only bitter to him, only dying,

Go with me like good angels to my end;

And as the long divorce of steel falls on me

Make of your prayers one sweet sacrifice,

And lift my soul to heaven. Lead on, a God's name.

do beseech your Grace, for charity,

If ever any malice in your heart

Were hid against me, now to forgive me frankly.

Sir Thomas Lovell,  as free forgive you

As  would be forgiven.  forgive all.

There cannot be those numberless offences

'Gainst me that  cannot take peace with. No black envy

Shall mark my grave. Commend me to his Grace;

And if he speak of Buckingham, pray tell him

You met him half in heaven. My vows and prayers

Yet are the King's, and, till my soul forsake,

Shall cry for blessings on him. May he live

Longer than  have time to tell his years;

Ever belov'd and loving may his rule be;

And when old Time shall lead him to his end,

Goodness and he fill up one monument!

To th' water side  must conduct your Grace;

Then give my charge up to Sir Nicholas Vaux,

Who undertakes you to your end.

Prepare there;

The Duke is coming; see the barge be ready;

And fit it with such furniture as suits

The greatness of his person.

Nay, Sir Nicholas,

Let it alone; my state now will but mock me.

When  came hither  was Lord High Constable

And Duke of Buckingham; now, poor Edward Bohun.

Yet  am richer than my base accusers

That never knew what truth meant;  now seal it;

And with that blood will make 'em one day groan for't.

My noble father, Henry of Buckingham,

Who first rais'd head against usurping Richard,

Flying for succour to his servant Banister,

Being distress'd, was by that wretch betray'd

And without trial fell; God's peace be with him!

Henry the Seventh succeeding, truly pitying

My father's loss, like a most royal prince,

Restor'd me to my honours, and out of ruins

Made my name once more noble. Now his son,

Henry the Eighth, life, honour, name, and all

That made me happy, at one stroke has taken

For ever from the world.  had my trial,

And must needs say a noble one; which makes me

little happier than my wretched father;

Yet thus far we are one in fortunes: both

Fell by our servants, by those men we lov'd most--

most unnatural and faithless service.

Heaven has an end in all. Yet, you that hear me,

This from a dying man receive as certain:

Where you are liberal of your loves and counsels,

Be sure you be not loose; for those you make friends

And give your hearts to, when they once perceive

The least rub in your fortunes, fall away

Like water from ye, never found again

But where they mean to sink ye. All good people,

Pray for me!  must now forsake ye; the last hou
Of my long weary life is come upon me.

Farewell;

And when you would say something that is sad,

Speak how  fell.  have done; and God forgive me!

Exeunt  and train

, this is full of pity! Sir, it calls,

fear, too many curses on their heads

That were the authors.

If the Duke be guiltless,

'Tis full of woe; yet  can give you inkling

Of an ensuing evil, if it fall,

Greater than this.

Good angels keep it from us!

What may it be? You do not doubt my faith, sir?

This secret is so weighty, 'twill require

strong faith to conceal it.

Let me have it;

do not talk much.

am confident.

You shall, sir. Did you not of late days hea
buzzing of a separation

Between the King and Katharine?

Yes, but it held not;

For when the King once heard it, out of ange
He sent command to the Lord Mayor straight

To stop the rumour and allay those tongues

That durst disperse it.

But that slander, sir,

Is found a truth now; for it grows again

Fresher than e'er it was, and held for certain

The King will venture at it. Either the Cardinal

Or some about him near have, out of malice

To the good Queen, possess'd him with a scruple

That will undo her. To confirm this too,

Cardinal Campeius is arriv'd and lately;

As all think, for this business.

'Tis the Cardinal;

And merely to revenge him on the Empero
For not bestowing on him at his asking

The archbishopric of Toledo, this is purpos'd.

think you have hit the mark; but is't

not cruel

That she should feel the smart of this? The Cardinal

Will have his will, and she must fall.

'Tis woeful.

We are too open here to argue this;

Let's think in private more.

Exeunt

.

London. The palace


'My lord,

'The horses your lordship sent for, with all the care

had,  saw well chosen, ridden, and furnish'd. They were

young and handsome, and of the best breed in the north.

When they were ready to set out for London, a man of

my Lord Cardinal's, by commission, and main power, took

'em from me, with this reason: his master would be serv'd

before a subject, if not before the King; which stopp'd

our mouths, sir.'

fear he will indeed. Well, let him have them.

He will have all,  think.



Well met, my Lord Chamberlain.

Good day to both your Graces.

How is the King employ'd?

left him private,

Full of sad thoughts and troubles.

What's the cause?

It seems the marriage with his brother's wife

Has crept too near his conscience.

No, his conscience

Has crept too near another lady.

'Tis so;

This is the Cardinal's doing; the King-Cardinal,

That blind priest, like the eldest son of fortune,

Turns what he list. The King will know him one day.

Pray God he do! He'll never know himself else.

How holily he works in all his business!

And with what zeal! For, now he has crack'd the league

Between us and the Emperor, the Queen's great nephew,

He dives into the King's soul and there scatters

Dangers, doubts, wringing of the conscience,

Fears, and despairs--and all these for his marriage;

And out of all these to restore the King,

He counsels a divorce, a loss of he
That like a jewel has hung twenty years

About his neck, yet never lost her lustre;

Of her that loves him with that excellence

That angels love good men with; even of he
That, when the greatest stroke of fortune falls,

Will bless the King--and is not this course pious?

Heaven keep me from such counsel! 'Tis most true

These news are everywhere; every tongue speaks 'em,

And every true heart weeps for 't. All that dare

Look into these affairs see this main end--

The French King's sister. Heaven will one day open

The King's eyes, that so long have slept upon

This bold bad man.

And free us from his slavery.

We had need pray, and heartily, for our deliverance;

Or this imperious man will work us all

From princes into pages. All men's honours

Lie like one lump before him, to be fashion'd

Into what pitch he please.

For me, my lords,

love him not, nor fear him--there's my creed;

As  am made without him, so 'll stand,

If the King please; his curses and his blessings

Touch me alike; th' are breath  not believe in.

knew him, and  know him; so  leave him

To him that made him proud--the Pope.

Let's in;

And with some other business put the King

From these sad thoughts that work too much upon him.

My lord, you'll bear us company?

Excuse me,

The King has sent me otherwhere; besides,

You'll find a most unfit time to disturb him.

Health to your lordships!

Thanks, my good Lord Chamberlain.


draws the curtain and sits reading pensively

How sad he looks; sure, he is much afflicted.

Who's there, ha?

Pray God he be not angry.

Who's there,  say? How dare you thrust yourselves

Into my private meditations?

Who am , ha?

gracious king that pardons all offences

Malice ne'er meant. Our breach of duty this way

Is business of estate, in which we come

To know your royal pleasure.

Ye are too bold.

Go to; 'll make ye know your times of business.

Is this an hour for temporal affairs, ha?


Who's there? My good Lord Cardinal?  my Wolsey,

The quiet of my wounded conscience,

Thou art a cure fit for a King.    You're

welcome,

Most learned reverend sir, into our kingdom.

Use us and it.    My good lord, have great care

be not found a talker.

Sir, you cannot.

would your Grace would give us but an hou
Of private conference.

We are busy; go.

This priest has no pride in him!

Not to speak of!

would not be so sick though for his place.

But this cannot continue.

If it do,

'll venture one have-at-him.

another.

Exeunt  and 

Your Grace has given a precedent of wisdom

Above all princes, in committing freely

Your scruple to the voice of Christendom.

Who can be angry now? What envy reach you?

The Spaniard, tied by blood and favour to her,

Must now confess, if they have any goodness,

The trial just and noble. All the clerks,

mean the learned ones, in Christian kingdoms

Have their free voices. Rome the nurse of judgment,

Invited by your noble self, hath sent

One general tongue unto us, this good man,

This just and learned priest, Cardinal Campeius,

Whom once more  present unto your Highness.

And once more in mine arms  bid him welcome,

And thank the holy conclave for their loves.

They have sent me such a man  would have wish'd for.

Your Grace must needs deserve all strangers' loves,

You are so noble. To your Highness' hand

tender my commission; by whose virtue--

The court of Rome commanding--you, my Lord

Cardinal of York, are join'd with me their servant

In the unpartial judging of this business.

Two equal men. The Queen shall be acquainted

Forthwith for what you come. Where's Gardiner?

know your Majesty has always lov'd he
So dear in heart not to deny her that

woman of less place might ask by law--

Scholars allow'd freely to argue for her.

Ay, and the best she shall have; and my favou
To him that does best. God forbid else. Cardinal,

Prithee call Gardiner to me, my new secretary;


Re-enter  with 

Give me your hand: much

joy and favour to you;

You are the King's now.

But to be commanded

For ever by your Grace, whose hand has rais'd me.

Come hither, Gardiner.   

My Lord of York, was not one Doctor Pace

In this man's place before him?

Yes, he was.

Was he not held a learned man?

Yes, surely.

Believe me, there's an ill opinion spread then,

Even of yourself, Lord Cardinal.

How! Of me?

They will not stick to say you envied him

And, fearing he would rise, he was so virtuous,

Kept him a foreign man still; which so griev'd him

That he ran mad and died.

Heav'n's peace be with him!

That's Christian care enough. For living murmurers

There's places of rebuke. He was a fool,

For he would needs be virtuous: that good fellow,

If  command him, follows my appointment.

will have none so near else. Learn this, brother,

We live not to be grip'd by meaner persons.

Deliver this with modesty to th' Queen.



The most convenient place that  can think of

For such receipt of learning is Blackfriars;

There ye shall meet about this weighty business--

My Wolsey, see it furnish'd. , my lord,

Would it not grieve an able man to leave

So sweet a bedfellow? But, conscience, conscience!

, 'tis a tender place! and  must leave her.

Exeunt

.

London. The palace


Not for that neither. Here's the pang that pinches:

His Highness having liv'd so long with her, and she

So good a lady that no tongue could eve
Pronounce dishonour of her--by my life,

She never knew harm-doing--, now, afte
So many courses of the sun enthroned,

Still growing in a majesty and pomp, the which

To leave a thousand-fold more bitter than

'Tis sweet at first t' acquire--after this process,

To give her the avaunt, it is a pity

Would move a monster.

Hearts of most hard tempe
Melt and lament for her.

, God's will! much bette
She ne'er had known pomp; though't be temporal,

Yet, if that quarrel, fortune, do divorce

It from the bearer, 'tis a sufferance panging

As soul and body's severing.

Alas, poor lady!

She's a stranger now again.

So much the more

Must pity drop upon her. Verily,

swear 'tis better to be lowly born

And range with humble livers in content

Than to be perk'd up in a glist'ring grief

And wear a golden sorrow.

Our content

Is our best having.

By my troth and maidenhead,

would not be a queen.

Beshrew me,  would,

And venture maidenhead for 't; and so would you,

For all this spice of your hypocrisy.

You that have so fair parts of woman on you

Have too a woman's heart, which ever yet

Affected eminence, wealth, sovereignty;

Which, to say sooth, are blessings; and which gifts,

Saving your mincing, the capacity

Of your soft cheveril conscience would receive

If you might please to stretch it.

Nay, good troth.

Yes, troth and troth. You would not be a queen!

No, not for all the riches under heaven.

'Tis strange: a threepence bow'd would hire me,

Old as  am, to queen it. But,  pray you,

What think you of a duchess? Have you limbs

To bear that load of title?

No, in truth.

Then you are weakly made. Pluck off a little;

would not be a young count in your way

For more than blushing comes to. If your back

Cannot vouchsafe this burden, 'tis too weak

Ever to get a boy.

How you do talk!

swear again  would not be a queen

For all the world.

In faith, for little England

You'd venture an emballing.  myself

Would for Carnarvonshire, although there long'd

No more to th' crown but that. Lo, who comes here?


Good morrow, ladies. What were't worth to know

The secret of your conference?

My good lord,

Not your demand; it values not your asking.

Our mistress' sorrows we were pitying.

It was a gentle business and becoming

The action of good women; there is hope

All will be well.

Now,  pray God, amen!

You bear a gentle mind, and heav'nly blessings

Follow such creatures. That you may, fair lady,

Perceive  speak sincerely and high notes

Ta'en of your many virtues, the King's Majesty

Commends his good opinion of you to you, and

Does purpose honour to you no less flowing

Than Marchioness of Pembroke; to which tide

thousand pound a year, annual support,

Out of his grace he adds.

do not know

What kind of my obedience  should tender;

More than my all is nothing, nor my prayers

Are not words duly hallowed, nor my wishes

More worth than empty vanities; yet prayers and wishes

Are all  can return. Beseech your lordship,

Vouchsafe to speak my thanks and my obedience,

As from a blushing handmaid, to his Highness;

Whose health and royalty  pray for.

Lady,

shall not fail t' approve the fair conceit

The King hath of you.     have perus'd her well:

Beauty and honour in her are so mingled

That they have caught the King; and who knows yet

But from this lady may proceed a gem

To lighten all this isle?--'ll to the King

And say  spoke with you.

My honour'd lord!


Why, this it is: see, see!

have been begging sixteen years in court--

Am yet a courtier beggarly--nor could

Come pat betwixt too early and too late

For any suit of pounds; and you,  fate!

very fresh-fish here--fie, fie, fie upon

This compell'd fortune!--have your mouth fill'd up

Before you open it.

This is strange to me.

How tastes it? Is it bitter? Forty pence, no.

There was a lady once--'tis an old story--

That would not be a queen, that would she not,

For all the mud in Egypt. Have you heard it?

Come, you are pleasant.

With your theme  could

'ermount the lark. The Marchioness of Pembroke!

thousand pounds a year for pure respect!

No other obligation! By my life,

That promises moe thousands: honour's train

Is longer than his foreskirt. By this time

know your back will bear a duchess. Say,

Are you not stronger than you were?

Good lady,

Make yourself mirth with your particular fancy,

And leave me out on't. Would  had no being,

If this salute my blood a jot; it faints me

To think what follows.

The Queen is comfortless, and we forgetful

In our long absence. Pray, do not delive
What here y' have heard to her.

What do you think me?

Exeunt

.

London.  hall in Blackfriars


silver wands; next them, two , in the habit of doctors;

after them,

the    alone; after him, the  

, , , and  ; next them, with some

small distance, follows a  bearing the purse, with the

great seal,

and a Cardinal's hat; then two , bearing each silve
cross;

then a   bareheaded, accompanied with a

-- bearing a silver mace; then two 

bearing

two great silver pillars; after them, side by side, the two

, 

and ; two  with the sword and mace. Then ente
the

and  and their trains. The  takes place under the

cloth of state;

the two  sit under him as judges. The  takes place

some distance from the  The  place themselves on each

side

of the court, in manner of consistory; below them the 

The  sit next the  The rest of the attendants stand

in convenient order about the stage

Whilst our commission from Rome is read,

Let silence be commanded.

What's the need?

It hath already publicly been read,

And on all sides th' authority allow'd;

You may then spare that time.

Be't so; proceed.

Say 'Henry King of England, come into the court.'

Henry King of England, &c.

Here.

Say 'Katharine Queen of England, come into the court.'

Katharine Queen of England, &c.

The  makes no answer, rises out of her chair,

goes about the court, comes to the , and kneels

at his feet; then speaks

Sir,  desire you do me right and justice,

And to bestow your pity on me; fo
am a most poor woman and a stranger,

Born out of your dominions, having here

No judge indifferent, nor no more assurance

Of equal friendship and proceeding. Alas, sir,

In what have  offended you? What cause

Hath my behaviour given to your displeasure

That thus you should proceed to put me off

And take your good grace from me? Heaven witness,

have been to you a true and humble wife,

At all times to your will conformable,

Ever in fear to kindle your dislike,

Yea, subject to your countenance--glad or sorry

As  saw it inclin'd. When was the hou
ever contradicted your desire

Or made it not mine too? Or which of your friends

Have  not strove to love, although  knew

He were mine enemy? What friend of mine

That had to him deriv'd your anger did

Continue in my liking? Nay, gave notice

He was from thence discharg'd? Sir, call to mind

That  have been your wife in this obedience

Upward of twenty years, and have been blest

With many children by you. If, in the course

And process of this time, you can report,

And prove it too against mine honour, aught,

My bond to wedlock or my love and duty,

Against your sacred person, in God's name,

Turn me away and let the foul'st contempt

Shut door upon me, and so give me up

To the sharp'st kind of justice. Please you, sir,

The King, your father, was reputed fo
prince most prudent, of an excellent

And unmatch'd wit and judgment; Ferdinand,

My father, King of Spain, was reckon'd one

The wisest prince that there had reign'd by many

year before. It is not to be question'd

That they had gather'd a wise council to them

Of every realm, that did debate this business,

Who deem'd our marriage lawful. Wherefore  humbly

Beseech you, sir, to spare me till  may

Be by my friends in Spain advis'd, whose counsel

will implore. If not, i' th' name of God,

Your pleasure be fulfill'd!

You have here, lady,

And of your choice, these reverend fathers-men

Of singular integrity and learning,

Yea, the elect o' th' land, who are assembled

To plead your cause. It shall be therefore bootless

That longer you desire the court, as well

For your own quiet as to rectify

What is unsettled in the King.

His Grace

Hath spoken well and justly; therefore, madam,

It's fit this royal session do proceed

And that, without delay, their arguments

Be now produc'd and heard.

Lord Cardinal,

To you  speak.

Your pleasure, madam?

Sir,

am about to weep; but, thinking that

We are a queen, or long have dream'd so, certain

The daughter of a king, my drops of tears

'll turn to sparks of fire.

Be patient yet.

will, when you are humble; nay, before

Or God will punish me.  do believe,

Induc'd by potent circumstances, that

You are mine enemy, and make my challenge

You shall not be my judge; for it is you

Have blown this coal betwixt my lord and me--

Which God's dew quench! Therefore  say again,

utterly abhor, yea, from my soul

Refuse you for my judge, whom yet once more

hold my most malicious foe and think not

At all a friend to truth.

do profess

You speak not like yourself, who ever yet

Have stood to charity and display'd th' effects

Of disposition gentle and of wisdom

'ertopping woman's pow'r. Madam, you do me wrong:

have no spleen against you, nor injustice

For you or any; how far  have proceeded,

Or how far further shall, is warranted

By a commission from the Consistory,

Yea, the whole Consistory of Rome. You charge me

That  have blown this coal:  do deny it.

The King is present; if it be known to him

That  gainsay my deed, how may he wound,

And worthily, my falsehood! Yea, as much

As you have done my truth. If he know

That  am free of your report, he knows

am not of your wrong. Therefore in him

It lies to cure me, and the cure is to

Remove these thoughts from you; the which before

His Highness shall speak in,  do beseech

You, gracious madam, to unthink your speaking

And to say so no more.

My lord, my lord,

am a simple woman, much too weak

' oppose your cunning. 'are meek and humble-mouth'd;

You sign your place and calling, in full seeming,

With meekness and humility; but your heart

Is cramm'd with arrogancy, spleen, and pride.

You have, by fortune and his Highness' favours,

Gone slightly o'er low steps, and now are mounted

Where pow'rs are your retainers, and your words,

Domestics to you, serve your will as't please

Yourself pronounce their office.  must tell you

You tender more your person's honour than

Your high profession spiritual; that again

do refuse you for my judge and here,

Before you all, appeal unto the Pope,

To bring my whole cause 'fore his Holiness

And to be judg'd by him.

[She curtsies to the , and offers to

depart]

The Queen is obstinate,

Stubborn to justice, apt to accuse it, and

Disdainful to be tried by't; 'tis not well.

She's going away.

Call her again.

Katharine Queen of England, come into the court.

Madam, you are call'd back.

What need you note it? Pray you keep your way;

When you are call'd, return. Now the Lord help!

They vex me past my patience. Pray you pass on.

will not tarry; no, nor ever more

Upon this business my appearance make

In any of their courts.           Exeunt  and he
attendants

Go thy ways, Kate.

That man i' th' world who shall report he has

better wife, let him in nought be trusted

For speaking false in that. Thou art, alone--

If thy rare qualities, sweet gentleness,

Thy meekness saint-like, wife-like government,

Obeying in commanding, and thy parts

Sovereign and pious else, could speak thee out--

The queen of earthly queens. She's noble born;

And like her true nobility she has

Carried herself towards me.

Most gracious sir,

In humblest manner  require your Highness

That it shall please you to declare in hearing

Of all these ears--for where  am robb'd and bound,

There must  be unloos'd, although not there

At once and fully satisfied--whether eve
Did broach this business to your Highness, o
Laid any scruple in your way which might

Induce you to the question on't, or eve
Have to you, but with thanks to God for such

royal lady, spake one the least word that might

Be to the prejudice of her present state,

Or touch of her good person?

My Lord Cardinal,

do excuse you; yea, upon mine honour,

free you from't. You are not to be taught

That you have many enemies that know not

Why they are so, but, like to village curs,

Bark when their fellows do. By some of these

The Queen is put in anger. 'are excus'd.

But will you be more justified? You eve
Have wish'd the sleeping of this business; never desir'd

It to be stirr'd; but oft have hind'red, oft,

The passages made toward it. On my honour,

speak my good Lord Cardinal to this point,

And thus far clear him. Now, what mov'd me to't,

will be bold with time and your attention.

Then mark th' inducement. Thus it came--give heed to't:

My conscience first receiv'd a tenderness,

Scruple, and prick, on certain speeches utter'd

By th' Bishop of Bayonne, then French ambassador,

Who had been hither sent on the debating

marriage 'twixt the Duke of Orleans and

Our daughter Mary. ' th' progress of this business,

Ere a determinate resolution, he--

mean the Bishop-did require a respite

Wherein he might the King his lord advertise

Whether our daughter were legitimate,

Respecting this our marriage with the dowager,

Sometimes our brother's wife. This respite shook

The bosom of my conscience, enter'd me,

Yea, with a splitting power, and made to tremble

The region of my breast, which forc'd such way

That many maz'd considerings did throng

And press'd in with this caution. First, methought

stood not in the smile of heaven, who had

Commanded nature that my lady's womb,

If it conceiv'd a male child by me, should

Do no more offices of life to't than

The grave does to the dead; for her male issue

Or died where they were made, or shortly afte
This world had air'd them. Hence  took a thought

This was a judgment on me, that my kingdom,

Well worthy the best heir o' th' world, should not

Be gladded in't by me. Then follows that

weigh'd the danger which my realms stood in

By this my issue's fail, and that gave to me

Many a groaning throe. Thus hulling in

The wild sea of my conscience,  did stee
Toward this remedy, whereupon we are

Now present here together; that's to say

meant to rectify my conscience, which

then did feel full sick, and yet not well,

By all the reverend fathers of the land

And doctors learn'd. First,  began in private

With you, my Lord of Lincoln; you remembe
How under my oppression  did reek,

When  first mov'd you.

Very well, my liege.

have spoke long; be pleas'd yourself to say

How far you satisfied me.

So please your Highness,

The question did at first so stagger me--

Bearing a state of mighty moment in't

And consequence of dread--that  committed

The daring'st counsel which  had to doubt,

And did entreat your Highness to this course

Which you are running here.

then mov'd you,

My Lord of Canterbury, and got your leave

To make this present summons. Unsolicited

left no reverend person in this court,

But by particular consent proceeded

Under your hands and seals; therefore, go on,

For no dislike i' th' world against the person

Of the good Queen, but the sharp thorny points

Of my alleged reasons, drives this forward.

Prove but our marriage lawful, by my life

And kingly dignity, we are contented

To wear our moral state to come with her,

Katharine our queen, before the primest creature

That's paragon'd o' th' world.

So please your Highness,

The Queen being absent, 'tis a needful fitness

That we adjourn this court till further day;

Meanwhile must be an earnest motion

Made to the Queen to call back her appeal

She intends unto his Holiness.

may perceive

These cardinals trifle with me.  abho
This dilatory sloth and tricks of Rome.

My learn'd and well-beloved servant, Cranmer,

Prithee return. With thy approach  know

My comfort comes along.--Break up the court;

say, set on.                   Exuent in manner as they

entered

<<        

1990-1993   , ,  



()     

,  ()     


>>

.

London. The ' apartments


Take thy lute, wench. My soul grows

sad with troubles;

Sing and disperse 'em, if thou canst. Leave working.


Orpheus with his lute made trees,

And the mountain tops that freeze,

Bow themselves when he did sing;

To his music plants and flowers

Ever sprung, as sun and showers

There had made a lasting spring.

Every thing that heard him play,

Even the billows of the sea,

Hung their heads and then lay by.

In sweet music is such art,

Killing care and grief of heart

Fall asleep or hearing die.


How now?

An't please your Grace, the two great Cardinals

Wait in the presence.

Would they speak with me?

They will'd me say so, madam.

Pray their Graces


With me, a poor weak woman, fall'n from favour?

do not like their coming. Now  think on't,

They should be good men, their affairs as righteous;

But all hoods make not monks.


Peace to your Highness!

Your Graces find me here part of housewife;

would be all, against the worst may happen.

What are your pleasures with me, reverend lords?

May it please you, noble madam, to withdraw

Into your private chamber, we shall give you

The full cause of our coming.

Speak it here;

There's nothing  have done yet, o' my conscience,

Deserves a corner. Would all other women

Could speak this with as free a soul as  do!

My lords,  care not--so much  am happy

Above a number--if my actions

Were tried by ev'ry tongue, ev'ry eye saw 'em,

Envy and base opinion set against 'em,

know my life so even. If your business

Seek me out, and that way  am wife in,

Out with it boldly; truth loves open dealing.

Tanta est erga te mentis integritas, regina

serenissima--

, good my lord, no Latin!

am not such a truant since my coming,

As not to know the language  have liv'd in;

strange tongue makes my cause more strange, suspicious;

Pray speak in English. Here are some will thank you,

If you speak truth, for their poor mistress' sake:

Believe me, she has had much wrong. Lord Cardinal,

The willing'st sin  ever yet committed

May be absolv'd in English.

Noble lady,

am sorry my integrity should breed,

And service to his Majesty and you,

So deep suspicion, where all faith was meant

We come not by the way of accusation

To taint that honour every good tongue blesses,

Nor to betray you any way to sorrow--

You have too much, good lady; but to know

How you stand minded in the weighty difference

Between the King and you, and to deliver,

Like free and honest men, our just opinions

And comforts to your cause.

Most honour'd madam,

My Lord of York, out of his noble nature,

Zeal and obedience he still bore your Grace,

Forgetting, like a good man, your late censure

Both of his truth and him--which was too far--

Offers, as  do, in a sign of peace,

His service and his counsel.

To betray me.--

My lords,  thank you both for your good wins;

Ye speak like honest men--pray God ye prove so!

But how to make ye suddenly an answer,

In such a point of weight, so near mine honour,

More near my life,  fear, with my weak wit,

And to such men of gravity and learning,

In truth  know not.  was set at work

Among my maids, full little, God knows, looking

Either for such men or such business.

For her sake that  have been--for  feel

The last fit of my greatness--good your Graces,

Let me have time and counsel for my cause.

Alas,  am a woman, friendless, hopeless!

Madam, you wrong the King's love with these fears;

Your hopes and friends are infinite.

In England

But little for my profit; can you think, lords,

That any Englishman dare give me counsel?

Or be a known friend, 'gainst his Highness' pleasure--

Though he be grown so desperate to be honest--

And live a subject? Nay, forsooth, my friends,

They that must weigh out my afflictions,

They that my trust must grow to, live not here;

They are, as all my other comforts, far hence,

In mine own country, lords.

would your Grace

Would leave your griefs, and take my counsel.

How, sir?

Put your main cause into the King's protection;

He's loving and most gracious. 'Twill be much

Both for your honour better and your cause;

For if the trial of the law o'ertake ye

You'll part away disgrac'd.

He tells you rightly.

Ye tell me what ye wish for both--my ruin.

Is this your Christian counsel? Out upon ye!

Heaven is above all yet: there sits a Judge

That no king can corrupt.

Your rage mistakes us.

The more shame for ye; holy men  thought ye,

Upon my soul, two reverend cardinal virtues;

But cardinal sins and hollow hearts  fear ye.

Mend 'em, for shame, my lords. Is this your comfort?

The cordial that ye bring a wretched lady--

woman lost among ye, laugh'd at, scorn'd?

will not wish ye half my miseries:

have more charity; but say  warned ye.

Take heed, for heaven's sake take heed, lest at once

The burden of my sorrows fall upon ye.

Madam, this is a mere distraction;

You turn the good we offer into envy.

Ye turn me into nothing. Woe upon ye,

And all such false professors! Would you have me--

If you have any justice, any pity,

If ye be any thing but churchmen's habits--

Put my sick cause into his hands that hates me?

Alas! has banish'd me his bed already,

His love too long ago!  am old, my lords,

And all the fellowship  hold now with him

Is only my obedience. What can happen

To me above this wretchedness? All your studies

Make me a curse like this.

Your fears are worse.

Have  liv'd thus long--let me speak myself,

Since virtue finds no friends--a wife, a true one?

woman,  dare say without vain-glory,

Never yet branded with suspicion?

Have  with all my full affections

Still met the King, lov'd him next heav'n, obey'd him,

Been, out of fondness, superstitious to him,

Almost forgot my prayers to content him,

And am  thus rewarded? 'Tis not well, lords.

Bring me a constant woman to her husband,

One that ne'er dream'd a joy beyond his pleasure,

And to that woman, when she has done most,

Yet will  add an honour--a great patience.

Madam, you wander from the good we aim at.

My lord,  dare not make myself so guilty,

To give up willingly that noble title

Your master wed me to: nothing but death

Shall e'er divorce my dignities.

Pray hear me.

Would  had never trod this English earth,

Or felt the flatteries that grow upon it!

Ye have angels' faces, but heaven knows your hearts.

What will become of me now, wretched lady?

am the most unhappy woman living.

Alas, poor wenches, where are now

your fortunes?

Shipwreck'd upon a kingdom, where no pity,

No friends, no hope; no kindred weep for me;

Almost no grave allow'd me. Like the lily,

That once was mistress of the field, and flourish'd,

'll hang my head and perish.

If your Grace

Could but be brought to know our ends are honest,

You'd feel more comfort. Why should we, good lady,

Upon what cause, wrong you? Alas, our places,

The way of our profession is against it;

We are to cure such sorrows, not to sow 'em.

For goodness' sake, consider what you do;

How you may hurt yourself, ay, utterly

Grow from the King's acquaintance, by this carriage.

The hearts of princes kiss obedience,

So much they love it; but to stubborn spirits

They swell and grow as terrible as storms.

know you have a gentle, noble temper,

soul as even as a calm. Pray think us

Those we profess, peace-makers, friends, and servants.

Madam, you'll find it so. You wrong your virtues

With these weak women's fears.  noble spirit,

As yours was put into you, ever casts

Such doubts as false coin from it. The King loves you;

Beware you lose it not. For us, if you please

To trust us in your business, we are ready

To use our utmost studies in your service.

Do what ye will my lords; and pray

forgive me

If  have us'd myself unmannerly;

You know  am a woman, lacking wit

To make a seemly answer to such persons.

Pray do my service to his Majesty;

He has my heart yet, and shall have my prayers

While  shall have my life. Come, reverend fathers,

Bestow your counsels on me; she now begs

That little thought, when she set footing here,

She should have bought her dignities so dear.

Exeunt

.

London. The palace


, and the  

If you will now unite in your complaints

And force them with a constancy, the Cardinal

Cannot stand under them: if you omit

The offer of this time,  cannot promise

But that you shall sustain moe new disgraces

With these you bear already.

am joyful

To meet the least occasion that may give me

Remembrance of my father-in-law, the Duke,

To be reveng'd on him.

Which of the peers

Have uncontemn'd gone by him, or at least

Strangely neglected? When did he regard

The stamp of nobleness in any person

Out of himself?

My lords, you speak your pleasures.

What he deserves of you and me  know;

What we can do to him--though now the time

Gives way to us-- much fear. If you cannot

Bar his access to th' King, never attempt

Anything on him; for he hath a witchcraft

Over the King in's tongue.

, fear him not!

His spell in that is out; the King hath found

Matter against him that for ever mars

The honey of his language. No, he's settled,

Not to come off, in his displeasure.

Sir,

should be glad to hear such news as this

Once every hour.

Believe it, this is true:

In the divorce his contrary proceedings

Are all unfolded; wherein he appears

As  would wish mine enemy.

How came

His practices to light?

Most strangely.

, how, how?

The Cardinal's letters to the Pope miscarried,

And came to th' eye o' th' King; wherein was read

How that the Cardinal did entreat his Holiness

To stay the judgment o' th' divorce; for if

It did take place, ' do' quoth he 'perceive

My king is tangled in affection to

creature of the Queen's, Lady Anne Bullen.'

Has the King this?

Believe it.

Will this work?

The King in this perceives him how he coasts

And hedges his own way. But in this point

All his tricks founder, and he brings his physic

After his patient's death: the King already

Hath married the fair lady.

Would he had!

May you be happy in your wish, my lord!

For,  profess, you have it.

Now, all my joy

Trace the conjunction!

My amen to't!

All men's!

There's order given for her coronation;

Marry, this is yet but young, and may be left

To some ears unrecounted. But, my lords,

She is a gallant creature, and complete

In mind and feature.  persuade me from he
Will fall some blessing to this land, which shall

In it be memoriz'd.

But will the King

Digest this letter of the Cardinal's?

The Lord forbid!

Marry, amen!

No, no;

There be moe wasps that buzz about his nose

Will make this sting the sooner. Cardinal Campeius

Is stol'n away to Rome; hath ta'en no leave;

Has left the cause o' th' King unhandled, and

Is posted, as the agent of our Cardinal,

To second all his plot.  do assure you

The King cried 'Ha!' at this.

Now, God incense him,

And let him cry 'Ha!' louder!

But, my lord,

When returns Cranmer?

He is return'd in his opinions; which

Have satisfied the King for his divorce,

Together with all famous colleges

Almost in Christendom. Shortly,  believe,

His second marriage shall be publish'd, and

Her coronation. Katharine no more

Shall be call'd queen, but princess dowage
And widow to Prince Arthur.

This same Cranmer's

worthy fellow, and hath ta'en much pain

In the King's business.

He has; and we shall see him

For it an archbishop.

So  hear.

'Tis so.


The Cardinal!

Observe, observe, he's moody.

The packet, Cromwell,

Gave't you the King?

To his own hand, in's bedchamber.

Look'd he o' th' inside of the paper?

Presently

He did unseal them; and the first he view'd,

He did it with a serious mind; a heed

Was in his countenance. You he bade

Attend him here this morning.

Is he ready

To come abroad?

think by this he is.



It shall be to the Duchess of Alencon,

The French King's sister; he shall marry her.

Anne Bullen! No, 'll no Anne Bullens for him;

There's more in't than fair visage. Bullen!

No, we'll no Bullens. Speedily  wish

To hear from Rome. The Marchioness of Pembroke!

He's discontented.

May be he hears the King

Does whet his anger to him.

Sharp enough,

Lord, for thy justice!

The late Queen's gentlewoman, a knight's

daughter,

To be her mistress' mistress! The Queen's queen!

This candle burns not clear. 'Tis  must snuff it;

Then out it goes. What though  know her virtuous

And well deserving? Yet  know her fo
spleeny Lutheran; and not wholesome to

Our cause that she should lie i' th' bosom of

Our hard-rul'd King. Again, there is sprung up

An heretic, an arch one, Cranmer; one

Hath crawl'd into the favour of the King,

And is his oracle.

He is vex'd at something.


would 'twere something that would fret the string,

The master-cord on's heart!

The King, the King!

What piles of wealth hath he accumulated

To his own portion! And what expense by th' hou
Seems to flow from him! How, i' th' name of thrift,

Does he rake this together?--Now, my lords,

Saw you the Cardinal?

My lord, we have

Stood here observing him. Some strange commotion

Is in his brain: he bites his lip and starts,

Stops on a sudden, looks upon the ground,

Then lays his finger on his temple; straight

Springs out into fast gait; then stops again,

Strikes his breast hard; and anon he casts

His eye against the moon. In most strange postures

We have seen him set himself.

It may well be

There is a mutiny in's mind. This morning

Papers of state he sent me to peruse,

As  requir'd; and wot you what  found

There--on my conscience, put unwittingly?

Forsooth, an inventory, thus importing

The several parcels of his plate, his treasure,

Rich stuffs, and ornaments of household; which

find at such proud rate that it outspeaks

Possession of a subject.

It's heaven's will;

Some spirit put this paper in the packet

To bless your eye withal.

If we did think

His contemplation were above the earth

And fix'd on spiritual object, he should still

Dwell in his musings; but  am afraid

His thinkings are below the moon, not worth

His serious considering.

[The  takes his seat and whispers

, who goes to the ]

Heaven forgive me!

Ever God bless your Highness!

Good, my lord,

You are full of heavenly stuff, and bear the inventory

Of your best graces in your mind; the which

You were now running o'er. You have scarce time

To steal from spiritual leisure a brief span

To keep your earthly audit; sure, in that

deem you an ill husband, and am glad

To have you therein my companion.

Sir,

For holy offices  have a time; a time

To think upon the part of business which

bear i' th' state; and nature does require

Her times of preservation, which perforce

, her frail son, amongst my brethren mortal,

Must give my tendance to.

You have said well.

And ever may your Highness yoke together,

As  will lend you cause, my doing well

With my well saying!

'Tis well said again;

And 'tis a kind of good deed to say well;

And yet words are no deeds. My father lov'd you:

He said he did; and with his deed did crown

His word upon you. Since  had my office

have kept you next my heart; have not alone

Employ'd you where high profits might come home,

But par'd my present havings to bestow

My bounties upon you.

What should this mean?

The Lord increase this business!

Have  not made you

The prime man of the state?  pray you tell me

If what  now pronounce you have found true;

And, if you may confess it, say withal

If you are bound to us or no. What say you?

My sovereign,  confess your royal graces,

Show'r'd on me daily, have been more than could

My studied purposes requite; which went

Beyond all man's endeavours. My endeavours,

Have ever come too short of my desires,

Yet fil'd with my abilities; mine own ends

Have been mine so that evermore they pointed

To th' good of your most sacred person and

The profit of the state. For your great graces

Heap'd upon me, poor undeserver, 

Can nothing render but allegiant thanks;

My pray'rs to heaven for you; my loyalty,

Which ever has and ever shall be growing,

Till death, that winter, kill it.

Fairly answer'd!

loyal and obedient subject is

Therein illustrated; the honour of it

Does pay the act of it, as, i' th' contrary,

The foulness is the punishment.  presume

That, as my hand has open'd bounty to you,

My heart dropp'd love, my pow'r rain'd honour, more

On you than any, so your hand and heart,

Your brain, and every function of your power,

Should, notwithstanding that your bond of duty,

As 'twere in love's particular, be more

To me, your friend, than any.

do profess

That for your Highness' good  ever labour'd

More than mine own; that am, have, and will be--

Though all the world should crack their duty to you,

And throw it from their soul; though perils did

Abound as thick as thought could make 'em, and

Appear in forms more horrid--yet my duty,

As doth a rock against the chiding flood,

Should the approach of this wild river break,

And stand unshaken yours.

'Tis nobly spoken.

Take notice, lords, he has a loyal breast,

For you have seen him open 't. Read o'er this;


And after, this; and then to breakfast with

What appetite you have.


throng after him, smiling and whispering

What should this mean?

What sudden anger's this? How have  reap'd it?

He parted frowning from me, as if ruin

Leap'd from his eyes; so looks the chafed lion

Upon the daring huntsman that has gall'd him--

Then makes him nothing.  must read this paper;

fear, the story of his anger. 'Tis so;

This paper has undone me. 'Tis th' account

Of all that world of wealth  have drawn togethe
For mine own ends; indeed to gain the popedom,

And fee my friends in Rome.  negligence,

Fit for a fool to fall by! What cross devil

Made me put this main secret in the packet

sent the King? Is there no way to cure this?

No new device to beat this from his brains?

know 'twill stir him strongly; yet  know

way, if it take right, in spite of fortune,

Will bring me off again. What's this? 'To th' Pope.'

The letter, as  live, with all the business

writ to's Holiness. Nay then, farewell!

have touch'd the highest point of all my greatness,

And from that full meridian of my glory

haste now to my setting.  shall fall

Like a bright exhalation in the evening,

And no man see me more.

Re-enter to  the    and

, the   , and the 


Hear the King's pleasure, Cardinal, who commands you

To render up the great seal presently

Into our hands, and to confine yourself

To Asher House, my Lord of Winchester's,

Till you hear further from his Highness.

Stay:

Where's your commission, lords? Words cannot carry

Authority so weighty.

Who dares cross 'em,

Bearing the King's will from his mouth expressly?

Till  find more than will or words to do it--

mean your malice--know, officious lords,

dare and must deny it. Now  feel

Of what coarse metal ye are moulded--envy;

How eagerly ye follow my disgraces,

As if it fed ye; and how sleek and wanton

Ye appear in every thing may bring my ruin!

Follow your envious courses, men of malice;

You have Christian warrant for 'em, and no doubt

In time will find their fit rewards. That seal

You ask with such a violence, the King--

Mine and your master--with his own hand gave me;

Bade me enjoy it, with the place and honours,

During my life; and, to confirm his goodness,

Tied it by letters-patents. Now, who'll take it?

The King, that gave it.

It must be himself then.

Thou art a proud traitor, priest.

Proud lord, thou liest.

Within these forty hours Surrey durst bette
Have burnt that tongue than said so.

Thy ambition,

Thou scarlet sin, robb'd this bewailing land

Of noble Buckingham, my father-in-law.

The heads of all thy brother cardinals,

With thee and all thy best parts bound together,

Weigh'd not a hair of his. Plague of your policy!

You sent me deputy for Ireland;

Far from his succour, from the King, from all

That might have mercy on the fault thou gav'st him;

Whilst your great goodness, out of holy pity,

Absolv'd him with an axe.

This, and all else

This talking lord can lay upon my credit,

answer is most false. The Duke by law

Found his deserts; how innocent  was

From any private malice in his end,

His noble jury and foul cause can witness.

If  lov'd many words, lord,  should tell you

You have as little honesty as honour,

That in the way of loyalty and truth

Toward the King, my ever royal master,

Dare mate a sounder man than Surrey can be

And all that love his follies.

By my soul,

Your long coat, priest, protects you; thou shouldst feel

My sword i' the life-blood of thee else. My lords

Can ye endure to hear this arrogance?

And from this fellow? If we live thus tamely,

To be thus jaded by a piece of scarlet,

Farewell nobility! Let his Grace go forward

And dare us with his cap like larks.

All goodness

Is poison to thy stomach.

Yes, that goodness

Of gleaning all the land's wealth into one,

Into your own hands, Cardinal, by extortion;

The goodness of your intercepted packets

You writ to th' Pope against the King; your goodness,

Since you provoke me, shall be most notorious.

My Lord of Norfolk, as you are truly noble,

As you respect the common good, the state

Of our despis'd nobility, our issues,

Whom, if he live, will scarce be gentlemen--

Produce the grand sum of his sins, the articles

Collected from his life. 'll startle you

Worse than the sacring bell, when the brown wench

Lay kissing in your arms, Lord Cardinal.

How much, methinks,  could despise this man,

But that  am bound in charity against it!

Those articles, my lord, are in the King's hand;

But, thus much, they are foul ones.

So much faire
And spotless shall mine innocence arise,

When the King knows my truth.

This cannot save you.

thank my memory  yet remembe
Some of these articles; and out they shall.

Now, if you can blush and cry guilty, Cardinal,

You'll show a little honesty.

Speak on, sir;

dare your worst objections. If  blush,

It is to see a nobleman want manners.

had rather want those than my head. Have at you!

First, that without the King's assent or knowledge

You wrought to be a legate; by which powe
You maim'd the jurisdiction of all bishops.

Then, that in all you writ to Rome, or else

To foreign princes, 'Ego et Rex meus'

Was still inscrib'd; in which you brought the King

To be your servant.

Then, that without the knowledge

Either of King or Council, when you went

Ambassador to the Emperor, you made bold

To carry into Flanders the great seal.

Item, you sent a large commission

To Gregory de Cassado, to conclude,

Without the King's will or the state's allowance,

league between his Highness and Ferrara.

That out of mere ambition you have caus'd

Your holy hat to be stamp'd on the King's coin.

Then, that you have sent innumerable substance,

By what means got  leave to your own conscience,

To furnish Rome and to prepare the ways

You have for dignities, to the mere undoing

Of all the kingdom. Many more there are,

Which, since they are of you, and odious,

will not taint my mouth with.

my lord,

Press not a falling man too far! 'Tis virtue.

His faults lie open to the laws; let them,

Not you, correct him. My heart weeps to see him

So little of his great self.

forgive him.

Lord Cardinal, the King's further pleasure is--

Because all those things you have done of late,

By your power legatine within this kingdom,

Fall into th' compass of a praemunire--

That therefore such a writ be sued against you:

To forfeit all your goods, lands, tenements,

Chattels, and whatsoever, and to be

Out of the King's protection. This is my charge.

And so we'll leave you to your meditations

How to live better. For your stubborn answe
About the giving back the great seal to us,

The King shall know it, and, no doubt, shall thank you.

So fare you well, my little good Lord Cardinal.

Exeunt all but 

So farewell to the little good you bear me.

Farewell, a long farewell, to all my greatness!

This is the state of man: to-day he puts forth

The tender leaves of hopes; to-morrow blossoms

And bears his blushing honours thick upon him;

The third day comes a frost, a killing frost,

And when he thinks, good easy man, full surely

His greatness is a-ripening, nips his root,

And then he falls, as  do.  have ventur'd,

Like little wanton boys that swim on bladders,

This many summers in a sea of glory;

But far beyond my depth. My high-blown pride

At length broke under me, and now has left me,

Weary and old with service, to the mercy

Of a rude stream, that must for ever hide me.

Vain pomp and glory of this world,  hate ye;

feel my heart new open'd. , how wretched

Is that poor man that hangs on princes' favours!

There is betwixt that smile we would aspire to,

That sweet aspect of princes, and their ruin

More pangs and fears than wars or women have;

And when he falls, he falls like Lucifer,

Never to hope again.


Why, how now, Cromwell!

have no power to speak, sir.

What, amaz'd

At my misfortunes? Can thy spirit wonde
great man should decline? Nay, an you weep,

am fall'n indeed.

How does your Grace?

Why, well;

Never so truly happy, my good Cromwell.

know myself now, and  feel within me

peace above all earthly dignities,

still and quiet conscience. The King has cur'd me,

humbly thank his Grace; and from these shoulders,

These ruin'd pillars, out of pity, taken

load would sink a navy--too much honour.

, 'tis a burden, Cromwell, 'tis a burden

Too heavy for a man that hopes for heaven!

am glad your Grace has made that right use of it.

hope  have.  am able now, methinks,

Out of a fortitude of soul  feel,

To endure more miseries and greater fa
Than my weak-hearted enemies dare offer.

What news abroad?

The heaviest and the worst

Is your displeasure with the King.

God bless him!

The next is that Sir Thomas More is chosen

Lord Chancellor in your place.

That's somewhat sudden.

But he's a learned man. May he continue

Long in his Highness' favour, and do justice

For truth's sake and his conscience; that his bones

When he has run his course and sleeps in blessings,

May have a tomb of orphans' tears wept on him!

What more?

That Cranmer is return'd with welcome,

Install'd Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

That's news indeed.

Last, that the Lady Anne,

Whom the King hath in secrecy long married,

This day was view'd in open as his queen,

Going to chapel; and the voice is now

Only about her coronation.

There was the weight that pull'd me down.

Cromwell,

The King has gone beyond me. All my glories

In that one woman  have lost for ever.

No sun shall ever usher forth mine honours,

Or gild again the noble troops that waited

Upon my smiles. Go get thee from me, Cromwell;

am a poor fall'n man, unworthy now

To be thy lord and master. Seek the King;

That sun,  pray, may never set!  have told him

What and how true thou art. He will advance thee;

Some little memory of me will stir him--

know his noble nature--not to let

Thy hopeful service perish too. Good Cromwell,

Neglect him not; make use now, and provide

For thine own future safety.

my lord,

Must  then leave you? Must  needs forgo

So good, so noble, and so true a master?

Bear witness, all that have not hearts of iron,

With what a sorrow Cromwell leaves his lord.

The King shall have my service; but my prayers

For ever and for ever shall be yours.

Cromwell,  did not think to shed a tea
In all my miseries; but thou hast forc'd me,

Out of thy honest truth, to play the woman.

Let's dry our eyes; and thus far hear me, Cromwell,

And when  am forgotten, as  shall be,

And sleep in dull cold marble, where no mention

Of me more must be heard of, say  taught thee--

Say Wolsey, that once trod the ways of glory,

And sounded all the depths and shoals of honour,

Found thee a way, out of his wreck, to rise in--

sure and safe one, though thy master miss'd it.

Mark but my fall and that that ruin'd me.

Cromwell,  charge thee, fling away ambition:

By that sin fell the angels. How can man then,

The image of his Maker, hope to win by it?

Love thyself last; cherish those hearts that hate thee;

Corruption wins not more than honesty.

Still in thy right hand carry gentle peace

To silence envious tongues. Be just, and fear not;

Let all the ends thou aim'st at be thy country's,

Thy God's, and truth's; then, if thou fall'st,  Cromwell,

Thou fall'st a blessed martyr!

Serve the King, and--prithee lead me in.

There take an inventory of all  have

To the last penny; 'tis the King's. My robe,

And my integrity to heaven, is all

dare now call mine own.  Cromwell, Cromwell!

Had  but serv'd my God with half the zeal

serv'd my King, he would not in mine age

Have left me naked to mine enemies.

Good sir, have patience.

So  have. Farewell

The hopes of court! My hopes in heaven do dwell.

Exeunt

<<        

1990-1993   , ,  



()     

,  ()     


>>

.

street in Westminste

'are well met once again.

So are you.

You come to take your stand here, and

behold

The Lady Anne pass from her coronation?

'Tis all my business. At our last encounte
The Duke of Buckingham came from his trial.

'Tis very true. But that time offer'd

sorrow;

This, general joy.

'Tis well. The citizens,

am sure, have shown at full their royal minds--

As, let 'em have their rights, they are ever forward--

In celebration of this day with shows,

Pageants, and sights of honour.

Never greater,

Nor, 'll assure you, better taken, sir.

May  be bold to ask what that contains,

That paper in your hand?

Yes; 'tis the list

Of those that claim their offices this day,

By custom of the coronation.

The Duke of Suffolk is the first, and claims

To be High Steward; next, the Duke of Norfolk,

He to be Earl Marshal. You may read the rest.

thank you, sir; had  not known

those customs,

should have been beholding to your paper.

But,  beseech you, what's become of Katharine,

The Princess Dowager? How goes her business?

That  can tell you too. The Archbishop

Of Canterbury, accompanied with othe
Learned and reverend fathers of his order,

Held a late court at Dunstable, six miles of

From Ampthill, where the Princess lay; to which

She was often cited by them, but appear'd not.

And, to be short, for not appearance and

The King's late scruple, by the main assent

Of all these learned men, she was divorc'd,

And the late marriage made of none effect;

Since which she was removed to Kimbolton,

Where she remains now sick.

Alas, good lady!


The trumpets sound. Stand close, the Queen is coming.



.  lively flourish of trumpets.

. Then two 

.  , with purse and mace before him.

.  singing.


.   , bearing the mace. Then , in

his coat of arms, and on his head he wore a gilt coppe
crown.

.  , bearing a sceptre of gold, on his head a

demi-coronal of gold. With him, the   ,

bearing the rod of silver with the dove, crowned with an

earl's coronet. Collars of Esses.

.   , in his robe of estate, his coronet on

his head, bearing a long white wand, as High Steward.

With him, the   , with the rod of

marshalship, a coronet on his head. Collars of Esses.

.  canopy borne by four of the -; under it

the  in her robe; in her hair richly adorned with

pearl, crowned. On each side her, the   

and 

. The old   , in a coronal of gold

wrought with flowers, bearing the ' train.

10. Certain  or , with plain circlets of gold

without flowers.

Exeunt, first passing over the stage in order and

state, and then a great flourish of trumpets

royal train, believe me. These know.

Who's that that bears the sceptre?

Marquis Dorset;

And that the Earl of Surrey, with the rod.

bold brave gentleman. That should be

The Duke of Suffolk?

'Tis the same--High Steward.

And that my Lord of Norfolk?

Yes.

Heaven

bless thee!

Thou hast the sweetest face  ever look'd on.

Sir, as  have a soul, she is an angel;

Our king has all the Indies in his arms,

And more and richer, when he strains that lady;

cannot blame his conscience.

They that bea
The cloth of honour over her are four barons

Of the Cinque-ports.

Those men are happy; and so are all

are near her.

take it she that carries up the train

Is that old noble lady, Duchess of Norfolk.

It is; and all the rest are countesses.

Their coronets say so. These are stars

indeed,

And sometimes falling ones.

No more of that.


trumpets


God save you, sir! Where have you been broiling?

Among the crowds i' th' Abbey, where a finge
Could not be wedg'd in more;  am stifled

With the mere rankness of their joy.

You saw

The ceremony?

That  did.

How was it?

Well worth the seeing.

Good sir, speak it to us.

As well as  am able. The rich stream

Of lords and ladies, having brought the Queen

To a prepar'd place in the choir, fell off

distance from her, while her Grace sat down

To rest awhile, some half an hour or so,

In a rich chair of state, opposing freely

The beauty of her person to the people.

Believe me, sir, she is the goodliest woman

That ever lay by man; which when the people

Had the full view of, such a noise arose

As the shrouds make at sea in a stiff tempest,

As loud, and to as many tunes; hats, cloaks--

Doublets,  think--flew up, and had their faces

Been loose, this day they had been lost. Such joy

never saw before. Great-bellied women,

That had not half a week to go, like rams

In the old time of war, would shake the press,

And make 'em reel before 'em. No man living

Could say 'This is my wife' there, all were woven

So strangely in one piece.

But what follow'd?

At length her Grace rose, and with

modest paces

Came to the altar, where she kneel'd, and saintlike

Cast her fair eyes to heaven, and pray'd devoutly.

Then rose again, and bow'd her to the people;

When by the Archbishop of Canterbury

She had all the royal makings of a queen:

As holy oil, Edward Confessor's crown,

The rod, and bird of peace, and all such emblems

Laid nobly on her; which perform'd, the choir,

With all the choicest music of the kingdom,

Together sung 'Te Deum.' So she parted,

And with the same full state pac'd back again

To York Place, where the feast is held.

Sir,

You must no more call it York Place: that's past:

For since the Cardinal fell that title's lost.

'Tis now the King's, and called Whitehall.

know it;

But 'tis so lately alter'd that the old name

Is fresh about me.

What two reverend bishops

Were those that went on each side of the Queen?

Stokesly and Gardiner: the one of Winchester,

Newly preferr'd from the King's secretary;

The other, London.

He of Wincheste
Is held no great good lover of the Archbishop's,

The virtuous Cranmer.

All the land knows that;

However, yet there is no great breach. When it comes,

Cranmer will find a friend will not shrink from him.

Who may that be,  pray you?

Thomas Cromwell,

man in much esteem with th' King, and truly

worthy friend. The King has made him Maste
' th' jewel House,

And one, already, of the Privy Council.

He will deserve more.

Yes, without all doubt.

Come, gentlemen, ye shall go my way, which

Is to th' court, and there ye shall be my guests:

Something  can command. As  walk thither,

'll tell ye more.

You may command us, sir.

Exeunt

.

Kimbolton


Gentleman Usher, and , her woman

How does your Grace?

Griffith, sick to death!

My legs like loaden branches bow to th' earth,

Willing to leave their burden. Reach a chair.

So--now, methinks,  feel a little ease.

Didst thou not tell me, Griffith, as thou led'st me,

That the great child of honour, Cardinal Wolsey,

Was dead?

Yes, madam; but  think your Grace,

Out of the pain you suffer'd, gave no ear to't.

Prithee, good Griffith, tell me how he died.

If well, he stepp'd before me, happily,

For my example.

Well, the voice goes, madam;

For after the stout Earl Northumberland

Arrested him at York and brought him forward,

As a man sorely tainted, to his answer,

He fell sick suddenly, and grew so ill

He could not sit his mule.

Alas, poor man!

At last, with easy roads, he came to Leicester,

Lodg'd in the abbey; where the reverend abbot,

With all his covent, honourably receiv'd him;

To whom he gave these words: ' father Abbot,

An old man, broken with the storms of state,

Is come to lay his weary bones among ye;

Give him a little earth for charity!'

So went to bed; where eagerly his sickness

Pursu'd him still. And three nights after this,

About the hour of eight--which he himself

Foretold should be his last--full of repentance,

Continual meditations, tears, and sorrows,

He gave his honours to the world again,

His blessed part to heaven, and slept in peace.

So may he rest; his faults lie gently on him!

Yet thus far, Griffith, give me leave to speak him,

And yet with charity. He was a man

Of an unbounded stomach, ever ranking

Himself with princes; one that, by suggestion,

Tied all the kingdom. Simony was fair play;

His own opinion was his law. ' th' presence

He would say untruths, and be ever double

Both in his words and meaning. He was never,

But where he meant to ruin, pitiful.

His promises were, as he then was, mighty;

But his performance, as he is now, nothing.

Of his own body he was ill, and gave

The clergy ill example.

Noble madam,

Men's evil manners live in brass: their virtues

We write in water. May it please your Highness

To hear me speak his good now?

Yes, good Griffith;

were malicious else.

This Cardinal,

Though from an humble stock, undoubtedly

Was fashion'd to much honour from his cradle.

He was a scholar, and a ripe and good one;

Exceeding wise, fair-spoken, and persuading;

Lofty and sour to them that lov'd him not,

But to those men that sought him sweet as summer.

And though he were unsatisfied in getting--

Which was a sin--yet in bestowing, madam,

He was most princely: ever witness for him

Those twins of learning that he rais'd in you,

Ipswich and Oxford! One of which fell with him,

Unwilling to outlive the good that did it;

The other, though unfinish'd, yet so famous,

So excellent in art, and still so rising,

That Christendom shall ever speak his virtue.

His overthrow heap'd happiness upon him;

For then, and not till then, he felt himself,

And found the blessedness of being little.

And, to add greater honours to his age

Than man could give him, he died fearing God.

After my death  wish no other herald,

No other speaker of my living actions,

To keep mine honour from corruption,

But such an honest chronicler as Griffith.

Whom  most hated living, thou hast made me,

With thy religious truth and modesty,

Now in his ashes honour. Peace be with him!

Patience, be near me still, and set me lower:

have not long to trouble thee. Good Griffith,

Cause the musicians play me that sad note

nam'd my knell, whilst  sit meditating

On that celestial harmony  go to.

[Sad and solemn

music]

She is asleep. Good wench, let's sit down quiet,

For fear we wake her. Softly, gentle Patience.



clad in white robes, wearing on thei
heads garlands of bays, and golden vizards on thei
faces; branches of bays or palm in their hands. They

first congee unto her, then dance; and, at certain

changes, the first two hold a spare garland over he
head, at which the other four make reverent curtsies.

Then the two that held the garland deliver the

same to the other next two, who observe the same

order in their changes, and holding the garland ove
her head; which done, they deliver the same garland

to the last two, who likewise observe the same order;

at which, as it were by inspiration, she makes

in her sleep signs of rejoicing, and holdeth up he
hands to heaven. And so in their dancing vanish,

carrying the garland with them. The music continues.

Spirits of peace, where are ye? Are ye all gone?

And leave me here in wretchedness behind ye?

Madam, we are here.

It is not you  call for.

Saw ye none enter since  slept?

None, madam.

No? Saw you not, even now, a blessed troop

Invite me to a banquet; whose bright faces

Cast thousand beams upon me, like the sun?

They promis'd me eternal happiness,

And brought me garlands, Griffith, which  feel

am not worthy yet to wear.  shall, assuredly.

am most joyful, madam, such good dreams

Possess your fancy.

Bid the music leave,

They are harsh and heavy to me.                    [Music

ceases]

Do you note

How much her Grace is alter'd on the sudden?

How long her face is drawn! How pale she looks,

And of an earthly cold! Mark her eyes.

She is going, wench. Pray, pray.

Heaven comfort her!


An't like your Grace--

You are a saucy fellow.

Deserve we no more reverence?

You are to blame,

Knowing she will not lose her wonted greatness,

To use so rude behaviour. Go to, kneel.

humbly do entreat your Highness' pardon;

My haste made me unmannerly. There is staying

gentleman, sent from the King, to see you.

Admit him entrance, Griffith; but this fellow



If my sight fail not,

You should be Lord Ambassador from the Emperor,

My royal nephew, and your name Capucius.

Madam, the same--your servant.

, my Lord,

The times and titles now are alter'd strangely

With me since first you knew me. But,  pray you,

What is your pleasure with me?

Noble lady,

First, mine own service to your Grace; the next,

The King's request that  would visit you,

Who grieves much for your weakness, and by me

Sends you his princely commendations

And heartily entreats you take good comfort.

my good lord, that comfort comes too late,

'Tis like a pardon after execution:

That gentle physic, given in time, had cur'd me;

But now  am past all comforts here, but prayers.

How does his Highness?

Madam, in good health.

So may he ever do! and ever flourish

When  shall dwell with worms, and my poor name

Banish'd the kingdom! Patience, is that lette
caus'd you write yet sent away?

No, madam.                       [Giving it to

]

Sir,  most humbly pray you to delive
This to my lord the King.

Most willing, madam.

In which  have commended to his goodness

The model of our chaste loves, his young daughter--

The dews of heaven fall thick in blessings on her!--

Beseeching him to give her virtuous breeding--

She is young, and of a noble modest nature;

hope she will deserve well--and a little

To love her for her mother's sake, that lov'd him,

Heaven knows how dearly. My next poor petition

Is that his noble Grace would have some pity

Upon my wretched women that so long

Have follow'd both my fortunes faithfully;

Of which there is not one,  dare avow--

And now  should not lie--but will deserve,

For virtue and true beauty of the soul,

For honesty and decent carriage,

right good husband, let him be a noble;

And sure those men are happy that shall have 'em.

The last is for my men--they are the poorest,

But poverty could never draw 'em from me--

That they may have their wages duly paid 'em,

And something over to remember me by.

If heaven had pleas'd to have given me longer life

And able means, we had not parted thus.

These are the whole contents; and, good my lord,

By that you love the dearest in this world,

As you wish Christian peace to souls departed,

Stand these poor people's friend, and urge the King

To do me this last right.

By heaven,  will,

Or let me lose the fashion of a man!

thank you, honest lord. Remember me

In all humility unto his Highness;

Say his long trouble now is passing

Out of this world. Tell him in death  bless'd him,

For so  will. Mine eyes grow dim. Farewell,

My lord. Griffith, farewell. Nay, Patience,

You must not leave me yet.  must to bed;

Call in more women. When  am dead, good wench,

Let me be us'd with honour; strew me ove
With maiden flowers, that all the world may know

was a chaste wife to my grave. Embalm me,

Then lay me forth; although unqueen'd, yet like

queen, and daughter to a king, inter me.

can no more.                          Exeunt, leading


<<        

1990-1993   , ,  



()     

,  ()     


>>

.  .

London.  gallery in the palace


him, met by   

It's one o'clock, boy, is't not?

It hath struck.

These should be hours for necessities,

Not for delights; times to repair our nature

With comforting repose, and not for us

To waste these times. Good hour of night, Sir Thomas!

Whither so late?

Came you from the King, my lord?

did, Sir Thomas, and left him at primero

With the Duke of Suffolk.

must to him too,

Before he go to bed. 'll take my leave.

Not yet, Sir Thomas Lovell. What's the matter?

It seems you are in haste. An if there be

No great offence belongs to't, give your friend

Some touch of your late business. Affairs that walk--

As they say spirits do--at midnight, have

In them a wilder nature than the business

That seeks despatch by day.

My lord,  love you;

And durst commend a secret to your ea
Much weightier than this work. The Queen's in labour,

They say in great extremity, and fear'd

She'll with the labour end.

The fruit she goes with

pray for heartily, that it may find

Good time, and live; but for the stock, Sir Thomas,

wish it grubb'd up now.

Methinks  could

Cry thee amen; and yet my conscience says

She's a good creature, and, sweet lady, does

Deserve our better wishes.

But, sir, sir--

Hear me, Sir Thomas. 'are a gentleman

Of mine own way;  know you wise, religious;

And, let me tell you, it will ne'er be well--

'Twill not, Sir Thomas Lovell, take't of me--

Till Cranmer, Cromwell, her two hands, and she,

Sleep in their graves.

Now, sir, you speak of two

The most remark'd i' th' kingdom. As for Cromwell,

Beside that of the Jewel House, is made Maste
' th' Rolls, and the King's secretary; further, sir,

Stands in the gap and trade of moe preferments,

With which the time will load him. Th' Archbishop

Is the King's hand and tongue, and who dare speak

One syllable against him?

Yes, yes, Sir Thomas,

There are that dare; and  myself have ventur'd

To speak my mind of him; and indeed this day,

Sir-- may tell it you-- think  have

Incens'd the lords o' th' Council, that he is--

For so  know he is, they know he is--

most arch heretic, a pestilence

That does infect the land; with which they moved

Have broken with the King, who hath so fa
Given ear to our complaint--of his great grace

And princely care, foreseeing those fell mischiefs

Our reasons laid before him--hath commanded

To-morrow morning to the Council board

He be convented. He's a rank weed, Sir Thomas,

And we must root him out. From your affairs

hinder you too long--good night, Sir Thomas.

Many good nights, my lord;  rest your servant.

Exeunt  and 


Charles,  will play no more to-night;

My mind's not on't; you are too hard for me.

Sir,  did never win of you before.

But little, Charles;

Nor shall not, when my fancy's on my play.

Now, Lovell, from the Queen what is the news?

could not personally deliver to he
What you commanded me, but by her woman

sent your message; who return'd her thanks

In the great'st humbleness, and desir'd your Highness

Most heartily to pray for her.

What say'st thou, ha?

To pray for her? What, is she crying out?

So said her woman; and that her suff'rance made

Almost each pang a death.

Alas, good lady!

God safely quit her of her burden, and

With gentle travail, to the gladding of

Your Highness with an heir!

'Tis midnight, Charles;

Prithee to bed; and in thy pray'rs remembe
Th' estate of my poor queen. Leave me alone,

For  must think of that which company

Will not be friendly to.

wish your Highness

quiet night, and my good mistress will

Remember in my prayers.



Well, sir, what follows?

Sir,  have brought my lord the Archbishop,

As you commanded me.

Ha! Canterbury?

Ay, my good lord.

'Tis true. Where is he, Denny?

He attends your Highness' pleasure.


This is about that which the bishop spake.

am happily come hither.

Re-enter , With 

Avoid the gallery.           

Ha!  have said. Be gone.

What!                               Exeunt  and 

am fearful--wherefore frowns he thus?

'Tis his aspect of terror. All's not well.

How now, my lord? You do desire to know

Wherefore  sent for you.

It is my duty

'attend your Highness' pleasure.

Pray you, arise,

My good and gracious Lord of Canterbury.

Come, you and  must walk a turn together;

have news to tell you; come, come, give me your hand.

Ah, my good lord,  grieve at what  speak,

And am right sorry to repeat what follows.

have, and most unwillingly, of late

Heard many grievous-- do say, my lord,

Grievous--complaints of you; which, being consider'd,

Have mov'd us and our Council that you shall

This morning come before us; where  know

You cannot with such freedom purge yourself

But that, till further trial in those charges

Which will require your answer, you must take

Your patience to you and be well contented

To make your house our Tow'r. You a brother of us,

It fits we thus proceed, or else no witness

Would come against you.

humbly thank your Highness

And am right glad to catch this good occasion

Most throughly to be winnowed where my chaff

And corn shall fly asunder; for  know

There's none stands under more calumnious tongues

Than  myself, poor man.

Stand up, good Canterbury;

Thy truth and thy integrity is rooted

In us, thy friend. Give me thy hand, stand up;

Prithee let's walk. Now, by my holidame,

What manner of man are you? My lord,  look'd

You would have given me your petition that

should have ta'en some pains to bring togethe
Yourself and your accusers, and to have heard you

Without indurance further.

Most dread liege,

The good  stand on is my truth and honesty;

If they shall fail,  with mine enemies

Will triumph o'er my person; which  weigh not,

Being of those virtues vacant.  fear nothing

What can be said against me.

Know you not

How your state stands i' th' world, with the whole world?

Your enemies are many, and not small; their practices

Must bear the same proportion; and not eve
The justice and the truth o' th' question carries

The due o' th' verdict with it; at what ease

Might corrupt minds procure knaves as corrupt

To swear against you? Such things have been done.

You are potently oppos'd, and with a malice

Of as great size. Ween you of better luck,

mean in perjur'd witness, than your Master,

Whose minister you are, whiles here He liv'd

Upon this naughty earth? Go to, go to;

You take a precipice for no leap of danger,

And woo your own destruction.

God and your Majesty

Protect mine innocence, or  fall into

The trap is laid for me!

Be of good cheer;

They shall no more prevail than we give way to.

Keep comfort to you, and this morning see

You do appear before them; if they shall chance,

In charging you with matters, to commit you,

The best persuasions to the contrary

Fail not to use, and with what vehemency

Th' occasion shall instruct you. If entreaties

Will render you no remedy, this ring

Deliver them, and your appeal to us

There make before them. Look, the good man weeps!

He's honest, on mine honour. God's blest Mother!

swear he is true-hearted, and a soul

None better in my kingdom. Get you gone,

And do as  have bid you.



He has strangled his language in his tears.


Come back; what mean you?

'll not come back; the tidings that  bring

Will make my boldness manners. Now, good angels

Fly o'er thy royal head, and shade thy person

Under their blessed wings!

Now, by thy looks

guess thy message. Is the Queen deliver'd?

Say ay, and of a boy.

Ay, ay, my liege;

And of a lovely boy. The God of Heaven

Both now and ever bless her! 'Tis a girl,

Promises boys hereafter. Sir, your queen

Desires your visitation, and to be

Acquainted with this stranger; 'tis as like you

As cherry is to cherry.

Lovell!


Sir?

Give her an hundred marks. 'll to the Queen.


An hundred marks? By this light, 'll ha' more!

An ordinary groom is for such payment.

will have more, or scold it out of him.

Said  for this the girl was like to him! 'll

Have more, or else unsay't; and now, while 'tis hot,

'll put it to the issue.

Exeunt

.  .

Lobby before the Council Chambe

hope  am not too late; and yet the gentleman

That was sent to me from the Council pray'd me

To make great haste. All fast? What means this? Ho!

Who waits there? Sure you know me?


Yes, my lord;

But yet  cannot help you.

Why?

Your Grace must wait till you be call'd for.


So.

This is a piece of malice.  am glad

came this way so happily; the King

Shall understand it presently.


'Tis Butts,

The King's physician; as he pass'd along,

How earnestly he cast his eyes upon me!

Pray heaven he sound not my disgrace! For certain,

This is of purpose laid by some that hate me--

God turn their hearts!  never sought their malice--

To quench mine honour; they would shame to make me

Wait else at door, a fellow councillor,

'Mong boys, grooms, and lackeys. But their pleasures

Must be fulfill'd, and  attend with patience.


'll show your Grace the strangest sight--

What's that, Butts?

think your Highness saw this many a day.

Body a me, where is it?

There my lord:

The high promotion of his Grace of Canterbury;

Who holds his state at door, 'mongst pursuivants,

Pages, and footboys.

Ha, 'tis he indeed.

Is this the honour they do one another?

'Tis well there's one above 'em yet.  had thought

They had parted so much honesty among 'em--

At least good manners--as not thus to suffe
man of his place, and so near our favour,

To dance attendance on their lordships' pleasures,

And at the door too, like a post with packets.

By holy Mary, Butts, there's knavery!

Let 'em alone, and draw the curtain close;

We shall hear more anon.

Exeunt

.  .

The Council Chambe
Council table brought in, with chairs and stools, and placed


upper end of the table on the left band, a seat being left void

above him,

as for Canterbury's seat.   ,   ,

,  , , seat themselves in

order on each side;  at lower end, as secretary.

at the doo
Speak to the business, master secretary;

Why are we met in council?

Please your honours,

The chief cause concerns his Grace of Canterbury.

Has he had knowledge of it?

Yes.

Who waits there?

Without, my noble lords?

Yes.

My Lord Archbishop;

And has done half an hour, to know your pleasures.

Let him come in.

Your Grace may enter now.

approaches the Council table

My good Lord Archbishop,  am very sorry

To sit here at this present, and behold

That chair stand empty; but we all are men,

In our own natures frail and capable

Of our flesh; few are angels; out of which frailty

And want of wisdom, you, that best should teach us,

Have misdemean'd yourself, and not a little,

Toward the King first, then his laws, in filling

The whole realm by your teaching and your chaplains--

For so we are inform'd--with new opinions,

Divers and dangerous; which are heresies,

And, not reform'd, may prove pernicious.

Which reformation must be sudden too,

My noble lords; for those that tame wild horses

Pace 'em not in their hands to make 'em gentle,

But stop their mouth with stubborn bits and spur 'em

Till they obey the manage. If we suffer,

Out of our easiness and childish pity

To one man's honour, this contagious sickness,

Farewell all physic; and what follows then?

Commotions, uproars, with a general taint

Of the whole state; as of late days our neighbours,

The upper Germany, can dearly witness,

Yet freshly pitied in our memories.

My good lords, hitherto in all the progress

Both of my life and office,  have labour'd,

And with no little study, that my teaching

And the strong course of my authority

Might go one way, and safely; and the end

Was ever to do well. Nor is there living--

speak it with a single heart, my lords--

man that more detests, more stirs against,

Both in his private conscience and his place,

Defacers of a public peace than  do.

Pray heaven the King may never find a heart

With less allegiance in it! Men that make

Envy and crooked malice nourishment

Dare bite the best.  do beseech your lordships

That, in this case of justice, my accusers,

Be what they will, may stand forth face to face

And freely urge against me.

Nay, my lord,

That cannot be; you are a councillor,

And by that virtue no man dare accuse you.

My lord, because we have business of more moment,

We will be short with you. 'Tis his Highness' pleasure

And our consent, for better trial of you,

From hence you be committed to the Tower;

Where, being but a private man again,

You shall know many dare accuse you boldly,

More than,  fear, you are provided for.

Ah, my good Lord of Winchester,  thank you;

You are always my good friend; if your will pass,

shall both find your lordship judge and juror,

You are so merciful.  see your end--

'Tis my undoing. Love and meekness, lord,

Become a churchman better than ambition;

Win straying souls with modesty again,

Cast none away. That  shall clear myself,

Lay all the weight ye can upon my patience,

make as little doubt as you do conscience

In doing daily wrongs.  could say more,

But reverence to your calling makes me modest.

My lord, my lord, you are a sectary;

That's the plain truth. Your painted gloss discovers,

To men that understand you, words and weakness.

My Lord of Winchester, y'are a little,

By your good favour, too sharp; men so noble,

However faulty, yet should find respect

For what they have been; 'tis a cruelty

To load a falling man.

Good Master Secretary,

cry your honour mercy; you may, worst

Of all this table, say so.

Why, my lord?

Do not  know you for a favoure
Of this new sect? Ye are not sound.

Not sound?

Not sound,  say.

Would you were half so honest!

Men's prayers then would seek you, not their fears.

shall remember this bold language.

Do.

Remember your bold life too.

This is too much;

Forbear, for shame, my lords.

have done.

And .

Then thus for you, my lord: it stands agreed,

take it, by all voices, that forthwith

You be convey'd to th' Tower a prisoner;

There to remain till the King's further pleasure

Be known unto us. Are you all agreed, lords?

We are.

Is there no other way of mercy,

But  must needs to th' Tower, my lords?

What othe
Would you expect? You are strangely troublesome.

Let some o' th' guard be ready there.


For me?

Must  go like a traitor thither?

Receive him,

And see him safe i' th' Tower.

Stay, good my lords,

have a little yet to say. Look there, my lords;

By virtue of that ring  take my cause

Out of the gripes of cruel men and give it

To a most noble judge, the King my master.

This is the King's ring.

'Tis no counterfeit.

'Tis the right ring, by heav'n.  told ye all,

When we first put this dangerous stone a-rolling,

'Twould fall upon ourselves.

Do you think, my lords,

The King will suffer but the little finge
Of this man to be vex'd?

'Tis now too certain;

How much more is his life in value with him!

Would  were fairly out on't!

My mind gave me,

In seeking tales and informations

Against this man--whose honesty the devil

And his disciples only envy at--

Ye blew the fire that burns ye. Now have at ye!


Dread sovereign, how much are we bound to heaven

In daily thanks, that gave us such a prince;

Not only good and wise but most religious;

One that in all obedience makes the church

The chief aim of his honour and, to strengthen

That holy duty, out of dear respect,

His royal self in judgment comes to hea
The cause betwixt her and this great offender.

You were ever good at sudden commendations,

Bishop of Winchester. But know  come not

To hear such flattery now, and in my presence

They are too thin and bare to hide offences.

To me you cannot reach you play the spaniel,

And think with wagging of your tongue to win me;

But whatsoe'er thou tak'st me for, 'm sure

Thou hast a cruel nature and a bloody.

Good man, sit down. Now let me see the proudest

He that dares most but wag his finger at thee.

By all that's holy, he had better starve

Than but once think this place becomes thee not.

May it please your Grace--

No, sir, it does not please me.

had thought  had had men of some understanding

And wisdom of my Council; but  find none.

Was it discretion, lords, to let this man,

This good man--few of you deserve that title--

This honest man, wait like a lousy footboy

At chamber door? and one as great as you are?

Why, what a shame was this! Did my commission

Bid ye so far forget yourselves?  gave ye

Power as he was a councillor to try him,

Not as a groom. There's some of ye,  see,

More out of malice than integrity,

Would try him to the utmost, had ye mean;

Which ye shall never have while  live.

Thus far,

My most dread sovereign, may it like your Grace

To let my tongue excuse all. What was purpos'd

Concerning his imprisonment was rather--

If there be faith in men--meant for his trial

And fair purgation to the world, than malice,

'm sure, in me.

Well, well, my lords, respect him;

Take him, and use him well, he's worthy of it.

will say thus much for him: if a prince

May be beholding to a subject,

Am for his love and service so to him.

Make me no more ado, but all embrace him;

Be friends, for shame, my lords! My Lord of Canterbury,

have a suit which you must not deny me:

That is, a fair young maid that yet wants baptism;

You must be godfather, and answer for her.

The greatest monarch now alive may glory

In such an honour; how may  deserve it,

That am a poor and humble subject to you?

Come, come, my lord, you'd spare your spoons. You

shall have

Two noble partners with you: the old Duchess of Norfolk

And Lady Marquis Dorset. Will these please you?

Once more, my Lord of Winchester,  charge you,

Embrace and love this man.

With a true heart

And brother-love  do it.

And let heaven

Witness how dear  hold this confirmation.

Good man, those joyful tears show thy true heart.

The common voice,  see, is verified

Of thee, which says thus: 'Do my Lord of Canterbury

shrewd turn and he's your friend for ever.'

Come, lords, we trifle time away;  long

To have this young one made a Christian.

As  have made ye one, lords, one remain;

So  grow stronger, you more honour gain.

Exeunt

.  .

The palace yard


You'll leave your noise anon, ye rascals. Do you

take the court for Paris garden? Ye rude slaves, leave you
gaping.


Belong to th' gallows, and be hang'd, ye rogue! Is

this a place to roar in? Fetch me a dozen crab-tree staves,

and strong ones; these are but switches to 'em. 'll scratch

your heads. You must be seeing christenings? Do you look

for ale and cakes here, you rude rascals?

Pray, sir, be patient; 'tis as much impossible,

Unless we sweep 'em from the door with cannons,

To scatter 'em as 'tis to make 'em sleep

On May-day morning; which will never be.

We may as well push against Paul's as stir 'em.

How got they in, and be hang'd?

Alas,  know not: how gets the tide in?

As much as one sound cudgel of four foot--

You see the poor remainder--could distribute,

made no spare, sir.

You did nothing, sir.

am not Samson, nor Sir Guy, nor Colbrand,

To mow 'em down before me; but if  spar'd any

That had a head to hit, either young or old,

He or she, cuckold or cuckold-maker,

Let me ne'er hope to see a chine again;

And that  would not for a cow, God save her!


shall be with you presently, good master puppy.

Keep the door close, sirrah.

What would you have me do?

What should you do, but knock 'em down by th'

dozens? Is this Moorfields to muster in? Or have we some

strange Indian with the great tool come to court, the

women so besiege us? Bless me, what a fry of fornication

is at door! On my Christian conscience, this one christening

will beget a thousand: here will be father, godfather,

and all together.

The spoons will be the bigger, sir. There is a fellow

somewhat near the door, he should be a brazier by his

face, for, o' my conscience, twenty of the dog-days now

reign in's nose; all that stand about him are under the line,

they need no other penance. That fire-drake did  hit three

times on the head, and three times was his nose discharged

against me; he stands there like a mortar-piece, to blow us.

There was a haberdasher's wife of small wit near him, that

rail'd upon me till her pink'd porringer fell off her head,

for kindling such a combustion in the state.  miss'd the

meteor once, and hit that woman, who cried out 'Clubs!'

when  might see from far some forty truncheoners draw

to her succour, which were the hope o' th' Strand, where

she was quartered. They fell on;  made good my place.

At length they came to th' broomstaff to me;  defied 'em

still; when suddenly a file of boys behind 'em, loose shot,

deliver'd such a show'r of pebbles that  was fain to draw

mine honour in and let 'em win the work: the devil was

amongst 'em,  think surely.

These are the youths that thunder at a playhouse

and fight for bitten apples; that no audience but the

tribulation of Tower-hill or the limbs of Limehouse, thei
dea
brothers, are able to endure.  have some of 'em in Limbo

Patrum, and there they are like to dance these three days;

besides the running banquet of two beadles that is to come.


Mercy o' me, what a multitude are here!

They grow still too; from all parts they are coming,

As if we kept a fair here! Where are these porters,

These lazy knaves? 'have made a fine hand, fellows.

There's a trim rabble let in: are all these

Your faithful friends o' th' suburbs? We shall have

Great store of room, no doubt, left for the ladies,

When they pass back from the christening.

An't please your honour,

We are but men; and what so many may do,

Not being torn a pieces, we have done.

An army cannot rule 'em.

As  live,

If the King blame me for't, 'll lay ye all

By th' heels, and suddenly; and on your heads

Clap round fines for neglect. 'are lazy knaves;

And here ye lie baiting of bombards, when

Ye should do service. Hark! the trumpets sound;

Th' are come already from the christening.

Go break among the press and find a way out

To let the troops pass fairly, or 'll find

Marshalsea shall hold ye play these two months.

Make way there for the Princess.

You great fellow,

Stand close up, or 'll make your head ache.

You i' th' camlet, get up o' th' rail;

'll peck you o'er the pales else.

Exeunt

.  .

The palace


,   , with his marshal's staff,  

,

two Noblemen bearing great standing-bowls for the christening

gifts;

then four Noblemen bearing a canopy, under which the  

, godmother, bearing the  richly habited in a mantle,

etc.,

train borne by a ; then follows the  ,

the other godmother, and  The troop pass once about the

stage, and  speaks

Heaven, from thy endless goodness, send prosperous

life, long and ever-happy, to the high and mighty

Princess of England, Elizabeth!


And to your royal Grace and the

good Queen!

My noble partners and myself thus pray:

All comfort, joy, in this most gracious lady,

Heaven ever laid up to make parents happy,

May hourly fall upon ye!

Thank you, good Lord Archbishop.

What is her name?

Elizabeth.

Stand up, lord.       

With this kiss take my blessing: God protect thee!

Into whose hand  give thy life.

Amen.

My noble gossips, y'have been too prodigal;

thank ye heartily. So shall this lady,

When she has so much English.

Let me speak, sir,

For heaven now bids me; and the words  utte
Let none think flattery, for they'll find 'em truth.

This royal infant--heaven still move about her!--

Though in her cradle, yet now promises

Upon this land a thousand blessings,

Which time shall bring to ripeness. She shall be--

But few now living can behold that goodness--

pattern to all princes living with her,

And all that shall succeed. Saba was neve
More covetous of wisdom and fair virtue

Than this pure soul shall be. All princely graces

That mould up such a mighty piece as this is,

With all the virtues that attend the good,

Shall still be doubled on her. Truth shall nurse her,

Holy and heavenly thoughts still counsel her;

She shall be lov'd and fear'd. Her own shall bless her:

Her foes shake like a field of beaten corn,

And hang their heads with sorrow. Good grows with her;

In her days every man shall eat in safety

Under his own vine what he plants, and sing

The merry songs of peace to all his neighbours.

God shall be truly known; and those about he
From her shall read the perfect ways of honour,

And by those claim their greatness, not by blood.

Nor shall this peace sleep with her; but as when

The bird of wonder dies, the maiden phoenix

Her ashes new create another hei
As great in admiration as herself,

So shall she leave her blessedness to one--

When heaven shall call her from this cloud of darkness--

Who from the sacred ashes of her honou
Shall star-like rise, as great in fame as she was,

And so stand fix'd. Peace, plenty, love, truth, terror,

That were the servants to this chosen infant,

Shall then be his, and like a vine grow to him;

Wherever the bright sun of heaven shall shine,

His honour and the greatness of his name

Shall be, and make new nations; he shall flourish,

And like a mountain cedar reach his branches

To all the plains about him; our children's children

Shall see this and bless heaven.

Thou speakest wonders.

She shall be, to the happiness of England,

An aged princess; many days shall see her,

And yet no day without a deed to crown it.

Would  had known no more! But she must die--

She must, the saints must have her--yet a virgin;

most unspotted lily shall she pass

To th' ground, and all the world shall mourn her.

Lord Archbishop,

Thou hast made me now a man; never before

This happy child did  get anything.

This oracle of comfort has so pleas'd me

That when  am in heaven  shall desire

To see what this child does, and praise my Maker.

thank ye all. To you, my good Lord Mayor,

And you, good brethren,  am much beholding;

have receiv'd much honour by your presence,

And ye shall find me thankful. Lead the way, lords;

Ye must all see the Queen, and she must thank ye,

She will be sick else. This day, no man think

Has business at his house; for all shall stay.

This little one shall make it holiday.

Exeunt

KING_HENRY_VIII|


'Tis ten to one this play can never please

All that are here. Some come to take their ease

And sleep an act or two; but those, we fear,

'have frighted with our trumpets; so, 'tis clear,

They'll say 'tis nought; others to hear the city

Abus'd extremely, and to cry 'That's witty!'

Which we have not done neither; that,  fear,

All the expected good w'are like to hea
For this play at this time is only in

The merciful construction of good women;

For such a one we show'd 'em. If they smile

And say 'twill do,  know within a while

All the best men are ours; for 'tis ill hap

If they hold when their ladies bid 'em clap.
