 

. London.  street



Now is the winter of our discontent

Made glorious summer by this son of York;

And all the clouds that loured upon our house

In the deep bosom of the ocean buried.

Now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths,

Our bruised arms hung up for monuments,

Our stern alarums changed to merry meetings,

Our dreadful marches to delightful measures.

Grim-visaged war hath smoothed his wrinkled front;

And now, instead of mounting barbed steeds

To fright the souls of fearful adversaries,

He capers nimbly in a lady’s chambe
To the lascivious pleasing of a lute.

But , that am not shaped for sportive tricks,

Nor made to court an amorous looking-glass;

, that am rudely stamped, and want love’s majesty

To strut before a wanton ambling nymph;

, that am curtailed of this fair proportion,

Cheated of feature by dissembling nature,

Deformed, unfinished, sent before my time

Into this breathing world scarce half made up,

And that so lamely and unfashionable

That dogs bark at me as  halt by them—

Why, , in this weak piping time of peace,

Have no delight to pass away the time,

Unless to spy my shadow in the sun,

And descant on mine own deformity.

And therefore, since  cannot prove a love
To entertain these fair well-spoken days,

am determined to prove a villain,

And hate the idle pleasures of these days.

Plots have  laid, inductions dangerous,

By drunken prophecies, libels, and dreams,

To set my brother Clarence and the King

In deadly hate the one against the other;

And if King Edward be as true and just

As  am subtle, false, and treacherous,

This day should Clarence closely be mewed up

About a prophecy which says that “”

Of Edward’s heirs the murderer shall be.

Dive, thoughts, down to my soul. Here Clarence comes.


Brother, good day. What means this armed guard

That waits upon your Grace?


His Majesty,

Tend’ring my person’s safety, hath appointed

This conduct to convey me to the Tower.


Upon what cause?


Because my name is George.


Alack, my lord, that fault is none of yours.

He should, for that, commit your godfathers.

, belike his Majesty hath some intent

That you should be new-christened in the Tower.

But what’s the matter, Clarence? May  know?


Yea, Richard, when  know, for  protest

As yet  do not. But, as  can learn,

He hearkens after prophecies and dreams,

And from the cross-row plucks the letter ,

And says a wizard told him that by “”

His issue disinherited should be.

And for my name of George begins with ,

It follows in his thought that  am he.

These, as  learn, and such like toys as these,

Hath moved his Highness to commit me now.


Why, this it is when men are ruled by women.

’Tis not the King that sends you to the Tower;

My Lady Grey his wife, Clarence, ’tis she

That tempers him to this extremity.

Was it not she and that good man of worship,

Antony Woodville, her brother there,

That made him send Lord Hastings to the Tower,

From whence this present day he is delivered?

We are not safe, Clarence; we are not safe.


By heaven,  think there is no man secure

But the Queen’s kindred, and night-walking heralds

That trudge betwixt the King and Mistress Shore.

Heard you not what an humble suppliant

Lord Hastings was to her for his delivery?


Humbly complaining to her deity

Got my Lord Chamberlain his liberty.

’ll tell you what:  think it is our way,

If we will keep in favour with the King,

To be her men and wear her livery.

The jealous o’er-worn widow and herself,

Since that our brother dubbed them gentlewomen,

Are mighty gossips in our monarchy.


beseech your Graces both to pardon me.

His Majesty hath straitly given in charge

That no man shall have private conference,

Of what degree soever, with your brother.


Even so; an please your worship, Brakenbury,

You may partake of anything we say.

We speak no treason, man. We say the King

Is wise and virtuous, and his noble Queen

Well struck in years, fair, and not jealous.

We say that Shore’s wife hath a pretty foot,

cherry lip, a bonny eye, a passing pleasing tongue;

And that the Queen’s kindred are made gentlefolks.

How say you, sir? Can you deny all this?


With this, my lord, myself have naught to do.


Naught to do with Mistress Shore?  tell thee, fellow,

He that doth naught with her, excepting one,

Were best to do it secretly alone.


What one, my lord?


Her husband, knave! Wouldst thou betray me?


do beseech your Grace to pardon me, and withal

Forbear your conference with the noble Duke.


We know thy charge, Brakenbury, and will obey.


We are the Queen’s abjects and must obey.

Brother, farewell.  will unto the King,

And whatsoe’er you will employ me in,

Were it to call King Edward’s widow “sister,”

will perform it to enfranchise you.

Meantime, this deep disgrace in brotherhood

Touches me deeper than you can imagine.


know it pleaseth neither of us well.


Well, your imprisonment shall not be long.

will deliver or else lie for you.

Meantime, have patience.


must perforce. Farewell.



Go tread the path that thou shalt ne’er return.

Simple, plain Clarence,  do love thee so

That  will shortly send thy soul to heaven,

If heaven will take the present at our hands.

But who comes here? The new-delivered Hastings?



Good time of day unto my gracious lord.


As much unto my good Lord Chamberlain.

Well are you welcome to the open air.

How hath your lordship brooked imprisonment?


With patience, noble lord, as prisoners must;

But  shall live, my lord, to give them thanks

That were the cause of my imprisonment.


No doubt, no doubt; and so shall Clarence too,

For they that were your enemies are his,

And have prevailed as much on him as you.


More pity that the eagles should be mewed,

Whiles kites and buzzards prey at liberty.


What news abroad?


No news so bad abroad as this at home:

The King is sickly, weak, and melancholy,

And his physicians fear him mightily.


Now, by Saint John, that news is bad indeed.

, he hath kept an evil diet long,

And overmuch consumed his royal person.

’Tis very grievous to be thought upon.

Where is he, in his bed?


He is.


Go you before, and  will follow you.


He cannot live,  hope, and must not die

Till George be packed with post-horse up to heaven.

’ll in to urge his hatred more to Clarence

With lies well steeled with weighty arguments;

And, if  fail not in my deep intent,

Clarence hath not another day to live;

Which done, God take King Edward to his mercy,

And leave the world for me to bustle in.

For then ’ll marry Warwick’s youngest daughter.

What though  killed her husband and her father?

The readiest way to make the wench amends

Is to become her husband and her father;

The which will , not all so much for love

As for another secret close intent,

By marrying her which  must reach unto.

But yet  run before my horse to market.

Clarence still breathes; Edward still lives and reigns.

When they are gone, then must  count my gains.


London. Another street


Lady Anne, being the mourner, Tressel and Berkeley and other Gentlemen.


Set down, set down your honourable load,

If honour may be shrouded in a hearse,

Whilst  awhile obsequiously lament

Th’ untimely fall of virtuous Lancaster.

Poor key-cold figure of a holy king,

Pale ashes of the house of Lancaster.

Thou bloodless remnant of that royal blood,

Be it lawful that  invocate thy ghost

To hear the lamentations of poor Anne,

Wife to thy Edward, to thy slaughtered son,

Stabbed by the selfsame hand that made these wounds.

Lo, in these windows that let forth thy life

pour the helpless balm of my poor eyes.

, cursed be the hand that made these holes;

Cursed the heart that had the heart to do it;

Cursed the blood that let this blood from hence.

More direful hap betide that hated wretch

That makes us wretched by the death of thee

Than  can wish to adders, spiders, toads,

Or any creeping venomed thing that lives.

If ever he have child, abortive be it,

Prodigious, and untimely brought to light,

Whose ugly and unnatural aspect

May fright the hopeful mother at the view,

And that be heir to his unhappiness.

If ever he have wife, let her be made

More miserable by the death of him

Than  am made by my young lord and thee.

Come now towards Chertsey with your holy load,

Taken from Paul’s to be interred there;

And still, as you are weary of this weight,

Rest you, whiles  lament King Henry’s corse.




Stay, you that bear the corse, and set it down.


What black magician conjures up this fiend

To stop devoted charitable deeds?


Villains, set down the corse or, by Saint Paul,

’ll make a corse of him that disobeys!


My lord, stand back, and let the coffin pass.


Unmannered dog, stand thou, when  command!

Advance thy halberd higher than my breast,

Or by Saint Paul ’ll strike thee to my foot

And spurn upon thee, beggar, for thy boldness.



What, do you tremble? Are you all afraid?

Alas,  blame you not, for you are mortal,

And mortal eyes cannot endure the devil.

Avaunt, thou dreadful minister of hell!

Thou hadst but power over his mortal body;

His soul thou canst not have; therefore begone.


Sweet saint, for charity, be not so curst.


Foul devil, for God’s sake, hence, and trouble us not;

For thou hast made the happy earth thy hell,

Filled it with cursing cries and deep exclaims.

If thou delight to view thy heinous deeds,

Behold this pattern of thy butcheries.

, gentlemen, see, see dead Henry’s wounds

Open their congealed mouths and bleed afresh!

Blush, blush, thou lump of foul deformity,

For ’tis thy presence that exhales this blood

From cold and empty veins where no blood dwells.

Thy deeds, inhuman and unnatural,

Provokes this deluge most unnatural.

God, which this blood mad’st, revenge his death!

earth, which this blood drink’st, revenge his death!

Either heaven with lightning strike the murderer dead,

Or earth gape open wide and eat him quick,

As thou dost swallow up this good King’s blood,

Which his hell-governed arm hath butchered.


Lady, you know no rules of charity,

Which renders good for bad, blessings for curses.


Villain, thou know’st nor law of God nor man.

No beast so fierce but knows some touch of pity.


But  know none, and therefore am no beast.


wonderful, when devils tell the truth!


More wonderful when angels are so angry.

Vouchsafe, divine perfection of a woman,

Of these supposed crimes to give me leave,

By circumstance, but to acquit myself.


Vouchsafe, diffused infection of a man,

Of these known evils but to give me leave,

By circumstance, to accuse thy cursed self.


Fairer than tongue can name thee, let me have

Some patient leisure to excuse myself.


Fouler than heart can think thee, thou canst make

No excuse current but to hang thyself.


By such despair  should accuse myself.


And by despairing shalt thou stand excused

For doing worthy vengeance on thyself

That didst unworthy slaughter upon others.


Say that  slew them not?


Then say they were not slain.

But dead they are, and, devilish slave, by thee.


did not kill your husband.


Why then he is alive.


Nay, he is dead, and slain by Edward’s hand.


In thy foul throat thou liest. Queen Margaret saw

Thy murd’rous falchion smoking in his blood,

The which thou once didst bend against her breast,

But that thy brothers beat aside the point.


was provoked by her sland’rous tongue,

That laid their guilt upon my guiltless shoulders.


Thou wast provoked by thy bloody mind,

That never dream’st on aught but butcheries.

Didst thou not kill this King?


grant ye.


Dost grant me, hedgehog? Then, God grant me too

Thou mayst be damned for that wicked deed.

, he was gentle, mild, and virtuous.


The better for the King of Heaven that hath him.


He is in heaven, where thou shalt never come.


Let him thank me that holp to send him thither,

For he was fitter for that place than earth.


And thou unfit for any place but hell.


Yes, one place else, if you will hear me name it.


Some dungeon.


Your bed-chamber.


Ill rest betide the chamber where thou liest!


So will it, madam, till  lie with you.


hope so.


know so. But, gentle Lady Anne,

To leave this keen encounter of our wits,

And fall something into a slower method:

Is not the causer of the timeless deaths

Of these Plantagenets, Henry and Edward,

As blameful as the executioner?


Thou wast the cause and most accursed effect.


Your beauty was the cause of that effect:

Your beauty, that did haunt me in my sleep

To undertake the death of all the world,

So  might live one hour in your sweet bosom.


If  thought that,  tell thee, homicide,

These nails should rend that beauty from my cheeks.


These eyes could not endure that beauty’s wrack;

You should not blemish it if  stood by.

As all the world is cheered by the sun,

So  by that; it is my day, my life.


Black night o’ershade thy day, and death thy life.


Curse not thyself, fair creature; thou art both.


would  were, to be revenged on thee.


It is a quarrel most unnatural,

To be revenged on him that loveth thee.


It is a quarrel just and reasonable,

To be revenged on him that killed my husband.


He that bereft thee, lady, of thy husband,

Did it to help thee to a better husband.


His better doth not breathe upon the earth.


He lives that loves thee better than he could.


Name him.


Plantagenet.


Why, that was he.


The selfsame name, but one of better nature.


Where is he?


Here.


Why dost thou spit at me?


Would it were mortal poison, for thy sake.


Never came poison from so sweet a place.


Never hung poison on a fouler toad.

Out of my sight! Thou dost infect mine eyes.


Thine eyes, sweet lady, have infected mine.


Would they were basilisks to strike thee dead!


would they were, that  might die at once;

For now they kill me with a living death.

Those eyes of thine from mine have drawn salt tears,

Shamed their aspects with store of childish drops.

These eyes, which never shed remorseful tear,

No, when my father York and Edward wept

To hear the piteous moan that Rutland made

When black-faced Clifford shook his sword at him;

Nor when thy warlike father, like a child,

Told the sad story of my father’s death,

And twenty times made pause to sob and weep,

That all the standers-by had wet their cheeks

Like trees bedashed with rain. In that sad time

My manly eyes did scorn an humble tear;

And what these sorrows could not thence exhale,

Thy beauty hath, and made them blind with weeping.

never sued to friend nor enemy;

My tongue could never learn sweet smoothing word;

But now thy beauty is proposed my fee,

My proud heart sues, and prompts my tongue to speak.


Teach not thy lip such scorn; for it was made

For kissing, lady, not for such contempt.

If thy revengeful heart cannot forgive,

Lo, here  lend thee this sharp-pointed sword,

Which if thou please to hide in this true breast

And let the soul forth that adoreth thee,

lay it naked to the deadly stroke,

And humbly beg the death upon my knee,

[_He kneels and lays his breast open; she offers at it with his

sword._]

Nay, do not pause, for  did kill King Henry—

But ’twas thy beauty that provoked me.

Nay, now dispatch; ’twas  that stabbed young Edward—

But ’twas thy heavenly face that set me on.


Take up the sword again, or take up me.


Arise, dissembler. Though  wish thy death,

will not be thy executioner.


Then bid me kill myself, and  will do it.


have already.


That was in thy rage.

Speak it again, and even with the word,

This hand, which for thy love did kill thy love,

Shall for thy love kill a far truer love.

To both their deaths shalt thou be accessary.


would  knew thy heart.


’Tis figured in my tongue.


fear me both are false.


Then never was man true.


Well, well, put up your sword.


Say then my peace is made.


That shalt thou know hereafter.


But shall  live in hope?


All men,  hope, live so.


Vouchsafe to wear this ring.


To take is not to give.



Look how my ring encompasseth thy finger;

Even so thy breast encloseth my poor heart;

Wear both of them, for both of them are thine.

And if thy poor devoted servant may

But beg one favour at thy gracious hand,

Thou dost confirm his happiness for ever.


What is it?


That it may please you leave these sad designs

To him that hath most cause to be a mourner,

And presently repair to Crosby Place;

Where, after  have solemnly interred

At Chertsey monastery this noble King,

And wet his grave with my repentant tears,

will with all expedient duty see you.

For divers unknown reasons,  beseech you,

Grant me this boon.


With all my heart, and much it joys me too

To see you are become so penitent.

Tressel and Berkeley, go along with me.


Bid me farewell.


’Tis more than you deserve;

But since you teach me how to flatter you,

Imagine  have said farewell already.



Sirs, take up the corse.


Towards Chertsey, noble lord?


No, to White Friars; there attend my coming.


Was ever woman in this humour wooed?

Was ever woman in this humour won?

’ll have her, but  will not keep her long.

What,  that killed her husband and his father,

To take her in her heart’s extremest hate,

With curses in her mouth, tears in her eyes,

The bleeding witness of her hatred by,

Having God, her conscience, and these bars against me,

And  no friends to back my suit at all,

But the plain devil and dissembling looks?

And yet to win her, all the world to nothing!

Ha!

Hath she forgot already that brave prince,

Edward, her lord, whom , some three months since,

Stabbed in my angry mood at Tewksbury?

sweeter and a lovelier gentleman,

Framed in the prodigality of nature,

Young, valiant, wise, and, no doubt, right royal,

The spacious world cannot again afford.

And will she yet abase her eyes on me,

That cropped the golden prime of this sweet prince,

And made her widow to a woeful bed?

On me, whose all not equals Edward’s moiety?

On me, that halt and am misshapen thus?

My dukedom to a beggarly denier,

do mistake my person all this while!

Upon my life, she finds, although  cannot,

Myself to be a marvellous proper man.

’ll be at charges for a looking-glass,

And entertain a score or two of tailors

To study fashions to adorn my body.

Since  am crept in favour with myself,

will maintain it with some little cost.

But first ’ll turn yon fellow in his grave,

And then return lamenting to my love.

Shine out, fair sun, till  have bought a glass,

That  may see my shadow as  pass.


London.  Room in the Palace


Grey.


Have patience, madam. There’s no doubt his Majesty

Will soon recover his accustomed health.


In that you brook it ill, it makes him worse.

Therefore, for God’s sake, entertain good comfort,

And cheer his Grace with quick and merry eyes.


If he were dead, what would betide on me?


No other harm but loss of such a lord.


The loss of such a lord includes all harms.


The heavens have blessed you with a goodly son

To be your comforter when he is gone.


Ah, he is young, and his minority

Is put unto the trust of Richard Gloucester,

man that loves not me, nor none of you.


Is it concluded he shall be Protector?


It is determined, not concluded yet;

But so it must be, if the King miscarry.



Here come the Lords of Buckingham and Derby.


Good time of day unto your royal Grace.


God make your Majesty joyful as you have been.


The Countess Richmond, good my Lord of Derby,

To your good prayer will scarcely say amen.

Yet, Derby, notwithstanding she’s your wife,

And loves not me, be you, good lord, assured

hate not you for her proud arrogance.


do beseech you, either not believe

The envious slanders of her false accusers,

Or if she be accused on true report,

Bear with her weakness, which  think proceeds

From wayward sickness, and no grounded malice.


Saw you the King today, my Lord of Derby?


But now the Duke of Buckingham and 

Are come from visiting his Majesty.


What likelihood of his amendment, lords?


Madam, good hope; his Grace speaks cheerfully.


God grant him health! Did you confer with him?


Ay, madam; he desires to make atonement

Between the Duke of Gloucester and your brothers,

And between them and my Lord Chamberlain;

And sent to warn them to his royal presence.


Would all were well—but that will never be.

fear our happiness is at the height.



They do me wrong, and  will not endure it!

Who is it that complains unto the King

That , forsooth, am stern and love them not?

By holy Paul, they love his Grace but lightly

That fill his ears with such dissentious rumours.

Because  cannot flatter and look fair,

Smile in men’s faces, smooth, deceive, and cog,

Duck with French nods and apish courtesy,

must be held a rancorous enemy.

Cannot a plain man live and think no harm,

But thus his simple truth must be abused

With silken, sly, insinuating Jacks?


To who in all this presence speaks your Grace?


To thee, that hast nor honesty nor grace.

When have  injured thee? When done thee wrong?

Or thee? Or thee? Or any of your faction?

plague upon you all! His royal Grace,

Whom God preserve better than you would wish,

Cannot be quiet scarce a breathing while

But you must trouble him with lewd complaints.


Brother of Gloucester, you mistake the matter.

The King, on his own royal disposition,

And not provoked by any suitor else,

Aiming, belike, at your interior hatred

That in your outward action shows itself

Against my children, brothers, and myself,

Makes him to send, that he may learn the ground

Of your ill will, and thereby to remove it.


cannot tell. The world is grown so bad

That wrens make prey where eagles dare not perch.

Since every Jack became a gentleman,

There’s many a gentle person made a Jack.


Come, come, we know your meaning, brother Gloucester.

You envy my advancement, and my friends’.

God grant we never may have need of you.


Meantime, God grants that we have need of you.

Our brother is imprisoned by your means,

Myself disgraced, and the nobility

Held in contempt, while great promotions

Are daily given to ennoble those

That scarce some two days since were worth a noble.


By Him that raised me to this careful height

From that contented hap which  enjoyed,

never did incense his Majesty

Against the Duke of Clarence, but have been

An earnest advocate to plead for him.

My lord, you do me shameful injury

Falsely to draw me in these vile suspects.


You may deny that you were not the mean

Of my Lord Hastings’ late imprisonment.


She may, my lord; for—


She may, Lord Rivers; why, who knows not so?

She may do more, sir, than denying that.

She may help you to many fair preferments,

And then deny her aiding hand therein,

And lay those honours on your high desert.

What may she not? She may, ay, marry, may she—


What, marry, may she?


What, marry, may she? Marry with a king,

bachelor, and a handsome stripling too.

Iwis your grandam had a worser match.


My lord of Gloucester,  have too long borne

Your blunt upbraidings and your bitter scoffs.

By heaven,  will acquaint his Majesty

Of those gross taunts that oft  have endured.

had rather be a country servant-maid

Than a great queen with this condition,

To be so baited, scorned, and stormed at.


Small joy have  in being England’s queen.


And lessened be that small, God,  beseech Him!

Thy honour, state, and seat, is due to me.


What, threat you me with telling of the King?

Tell him, and spare not. Look what  have said

will avouch ’t in presence of the King;

dare adventure to be sent to th’ Tower.

’Tis time to speak. My pains are quite forgot.


Out, devil!  do remember them too well:

Thou killed’st my husband Henry in the Tower,

And Edward, my poor son, at Tewksbury.


Ere you were queen, ay, or your husband king,

was a pack-horse in his great affairs;

weeder-out of his proud adversaries,

liberal rewarder of his friends.

To royalize his blood,  spilt mine own.


Ay, and much better blood than his or thine.


In all which time, you and your husband Grey

Were factious for the house of Lancaster.

And, Rivers, so were you. Was not your husband

In Margaret’s battle at Saint Albans slain?

Let me put in your minds, if you forget,

What you have been ere this, and what you are;

Withal, what  have been, and what  am.


murd’rous villain, and so still thou art.


Poor Clarence did forsake his father Warwick,

Ay, and forswore himself—which Jesu pardon!—


Which God revenge!


To fight on Edward’s party for the crown;

And for his meed, poor lord, he is mewed up.

would to God my heart were flint, like Edward’s,

Or Edward’s soft and pitiful, like mine.

am too childish-foolish for this world.


Hie thee to hell for shame, and leave this world,

Thou cacodemon! There thy kingdom is.


My lord of Gloucester, in those busy days

Which here you urge to prove us enemies,

We followed then our lord, our sovereign king.

So should we you, if you should be our king.


If  should be!  had rather be a pedler.

Far be it from my heart, the thought thereof.


As little joy, my lord, as you suppose

You should enjoy, were you this country’s king,

As little joy you may suppose in me

That  enjoy, being the Queen thereof.


As little joy enjoys the Queen thereof,

For  am she, and altogether joyless.

can no longer hold me patient.


Hear me, you wrangling pirates, that fall out

In sharing that which you have pilled from me!

Which of you trembles not that looks on me?

If not, that  am Queen, you bow like subjects,

Yet that, by you deposed, you quake like rebels.

Ah, gentle villain, do not turn away.


Foul wrinkled witch, what mak’st thou in my sight?


But repetition of what thou hast marred.

That will  make before  let thee go.


Wert thou not banished on pain of death?


was, but  do find more pain in banishment

Than death can yield me here by my abode.

husband and a son thou ow’st to me;

And thou a kingdom; all of you, allegiance.

This sorrow that  have by right is yours;

And all the pleasures you usurp are mine.


The curse my noble father laid on thee

When thou didst crown his warlike brows with paper,

And with thy scorns drew’st rivers from his eyes,

And then to dry them, gav’st the Duke a clout

Steeped in the faultless blood of pretty Rutland—

His curses then, from bitterness of soul

Denounced against thee, are all fall’n upon thee,

And God, not we, hath plagued thy bloody deed.


So just is God, to right the innocent.


, ’twas the foulest deed to slay that babe,

And the most merciless that e’er was heard of.


Tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.


No man but prophesied revenge for it.


Northumberland, then present, wept to see it.


What, were you snarling all before  came,

Ready to catch each other by the throat,

And turn you all your hatred now on me?

Did York’s dread curse prevail so much with heaven

That Henry’s death, my lovely Edward’s death,

Their kingdom’s loss, my woeful banishment,

Should all but answer for that peevish brat?

Can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven?

Why then, give way, dull clouds, to my quick curses!

Though not by war, by surfeit die your King,

As ours by murder, to make him a king.

Edward thy son, that now is Prince of Wales,

For Edward our son, that was Prince of Wales,

Die in his youth by like untimely violence.

Thyself a queen, for me that was a queen,

Outlive thy glory, like my wretched self.

Long mayst thou live to wail thy children’s death,

And see another, as  see thee now,

Decked in thy rights, as thou art stalled in mine;

Long die thy happy days before thy death,

And, after many lengthened hours of grief,

Die neither mother, wife, nor England’s Queen.

Rivers and Dorset, you were standers-by,

And so wast thou, Lord Hastings, when my son

Was stabbed with bloody daggers. God,  pray Him,

That none of you may live his natural age,

But by some unlooked accident cut off.


Have done thy charm, thou hateful withered hag.


And leave out thee? Stay, dog, for thou shalt hear me.

If heaven have any grievous plague in store

Exceeding those that  can wish upon thee,

, let them keep it till thy sins be ripe,

And then hurl down their indignation

On thee, the troubler of the poor world’s peace.

The worm of conscience still begnaw thy soul;

Thy friends suspect for traitors while thou liv’st,

And take deep traitors for thy dearest friends;

No sleep close up that deadly eye of thine,

Unless it be while some tormenting dream

Affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils.

Thou elvish-marked, abortive, rooting hog,

Thou that wast sealed in thy nativity

The slave of nature and the son of hell;

Thou slander of thy heavy mother’s womb,

Thou loathed issue of thy father’s loins,

Thou rag of honour, thou detested—


Margaret.


Richard!


Ha?


call thee not.


cry thee mercy then, for  did think

That thou hadst called me all these bitter names.


Why, so  did, but looked for no reply.

, let me make the period to my curse!


’Tis done by me, and ends in “Margaret”.


Thus have you breathed your curse against yourself.


Poor painted queen, vain flourish of my fortune,

Why strew’st thou sugar on that bottled spider,

Whose deadly web ensnareth thee about?

Fool, fool; thou whet’st a knife to kill thyself.

The day will come that thou shalt wish for me

To help thee curse this poisonous bunch-backed toad.


False-boding woman, end thy frantic curse,

Lest to thy harm thou move our patience.


Foul shame upon you, you have all moved mine.


Were you well served, you would be taught your duty.


To serve me well, you all should do me duty:

Teach me to be your queen, and you my subjects.

, serve me well, and teach yourselves that duty!


Dispute not with her; she is lunatic.


Peace, Master Marquess, you are malapert.

Your fire-new stamp of honour is scarce current.

, that your young nobility could judge

What ’twere to lose it and be miserable!

They that stand high have many blasts to shake them,

And if they fall they dash themselves to pieces.


Good counsel, marry. Learn it, learn it, Marquess.


It touches you, my lord, as much as me.


Ay, and much more; but  was born so high.

Our aery buildeth in the cedar’s top,

And dallies with the wind, and scorns the sun.


And turns the sun to shade, alas, alas!

Witness my son, now in the shade of death,

Whose bright out-shining beams thy cloudy wrath

Hath in eternal darkness folded up.

Your aery buildeth in our aery’s nest.

God, that seest it, do not suffer it!

As it is won with blood, lost be it so.


Peace, peace, for shame, if not for charity.


Urge neither charity nor shame to me.

Uncharitably with me have you dealt,

And shamefully my hopes by you are butchered.

My charity is outrage, life my shame,

And in that shame still live my sorrow’s rage.


Have done, have done.


princely Buckingham, ’ll kiss thy hand

In sign of league and amity with thee.

Now fair befall thee and thy noble house!

Thy garments are not spotted with our blood,

Nor thou within the compass of my curse.


Nor no one here, for curses never pass

The lips of those that breathe them in the air.


will not think but they ascend the sky,

And there awake God’s gentle sleeping peace.

Buckingham, take heed of yonder dog!

Look when he fawns, he bites; and when he bites,

His venom tooth will rankle to the death.

Have not to do with him; beware of him;

Sin, death, and hell have set their marks on him,

And all their ministers attend on him.


What doth she say, my lord of Buckingham?


Nothing that  respect, my gracious lord.


What, dost thou scorn me for my gentle counsel,

And soothe the devil that  warn thee from?

, but remember this another day,

When he shall split thy very heart with sorrow,

And say, poor Margaret was a prophetess.

Live each of you the subjects to his hate,

And he to yours, and all of you to God’s!



My hair doth stand on end to hear her curses.


And so doth mine.  muse why she’s at liberty.


cannot blame her. By God’s holy mother,

She hath had too much wrong; and  repent

My part thereof that  have done to her.


never did her any, to my knowledge.


Yet you have all the vantage of her wrong.

was too hot to do somebody good

That is too cold in thinking of it now.

Marry, as for Clarence, he is well repaid;

He is franked up to fatting for his pains.

God pardon them that are the cause thereof.


virtuous and a Christian-like conclusion,

To pray for them that have done scathe to us.


So do  ever— being well advised;

For had  cursed now,  had cursed myself.



Madam, his Majesty doth call for you,

And for your Grace, and you, my gracious lords.


Catesby,  come. Lords, will you go with me?


We wait upon your Grace.



do the wrong, and first begin to brawl.

The secret mischiefs that  set abroach

lay unto the grievous charge of others.

Clarence, whom  indeed have cast in darkness,

do beweep to many simple gulls,

Namely, to Derby, Hastings, Buckingham;

And tell them ’tis the Queen and her allies

That stir the King against the Duke my brother.

Now they believe it, and withal whet me

To be revenged on Rivers, Dorset, Grey.

But then  sigh, and, with a piece of Scripture,

Tell them that God bids us do good for evil;

And thus  clothe my naked villany

With odd old ends stol’n forth of Holy Writ,

And seem a saint when most  play the devil.


But soft, here come my executioners.

How now, my hardy, stout, resolved mates;

Are you now going to dispatch this thing?


We are, my lord, and come to have the warrant,

That we may be admitted where he is.


Well thought upon;  have it here about me.


When you have done, repair to Crosby Place.

But, sirs, be sudden in the execution,

Withal obdurate, do not hear him plead;

For Clarence is well-spoken, and perhaps

May move your hearts to pity, if you mark him.


Tut, tut, my lord, we will not stand to prate.

Talkers are no good doers. Be assured

We go to use our hands, and not our tongues.


Your eyes drop millstones when fools’ eyes fall tears.

like you, lads. About your business straight.

Go, go, dispatch.


We will, my noble lord.


London.  Room in the Towe


Why looks your Grace so heavily today?


,  have passed a miserable night,

So full of fearful dreams, of ugly sights,

That, as  am a Christian faithful man,

would not spend another such a night

Though ’twere to buy a world of happy days,

So full of dismal terror was the time!


What was your dream, my lord?  pray you tell me.


Methoughts that  had broken from the Tower,

And was embarked to cross to Burgundy;

And in my company my brother Gloucester,

Who from my cabin tempted me to walk

Upon the hatches. Thence we looked toward England,

And cited up a thousand heavy times,

During the wars of York and Lancaster,

That had befall’n us. As we paced along

Upon the giddy footing of the hatches,

Methought that Gloucester stumbled, and in falling,

Struck me, that thought to stay him, overboard

Into the tumbling billows of the main.

Lord, methought what pain it was to drown,

What dreadful noise of waters in my ears;

What sights of ugly death within my eyes.

Methoughts  saw a thousand fearful wracks;

thousand men that fishes gnawed upon;

Wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl,

Inestimable stones, unvalued jewels,

All scattered in the bottom of the sea.

Some lay in dead men’s skulls, and in the holes

Where eyes did once inhabit there were crept—

As ’twere in scorn of eyes—reflecting gems,

That wooed the slimy bottom of the deep,

And mocked the dead bones that lay scattered by.


Had you such leisure in the time of death

To gaze upon these secrets of the deep?


Methought  had; and often did  strive

To yield the ghost, but still the envious flood

Stopped in my soul, and would not let it forth

To find the empty, vast, and wand’ring air,

But smothered it within my panting bulk,

Who almost burst to belch it in the sea.


Awaked you not in this sore agony?


No, no, my dream was lengthened after life.

, then began the tempest to my soul.

passed, methought, the melancholy flood,

With that sour ferryman which poets write of,

Unto the kingdom of perpetual night.

The first that there did greet my stranger-soul

Was my great father-in-law, renowned Warwick,

Who spake aloud, “What scourge for perjury

Can this dark monarchy afford false Clarence?”

And so he vanished. Then came wand’ring by

shadow like an angel, with bright hai
Dabbled in blood; and he shrieked out aloud

“Clarence is come—false, fleeting, perjured Clarence,

That stabbed me in the field by Tewksbury!

Seize on him, Furies! Take him unto torment!”

With that, methoughts, a legion of foul fiends

Environed me, and howled in mine ears

Such hideous cries that with the very noise

trembling waked, and for a season afte
Could not believe but that  was in hell,

Such terrible impression made my dream.


No marvel, lord, though it affrighted you;

am afraid, methinks, to hear you tell it.


Ah, Keeper, Keeper,  have done these things,

That now give evidence against my soul,

For Edward’s sake, and see how he requites me.

God, if my deep prayers cannot appease Thee,

But Thou wilt be avenged on my misdeeds,

Yet execute Thy wrath in me alone;

, spare my guiltless wife and my poor children!

Keeper,  prithee sit by me awhile.

My soul is heavy, and  fain would sleep.


will, my lord; God give your Grace good rest.




Sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours,

Makes the night morning, and the noontide night.

Princes have but their titles for their glories,

An outward honour for an inward toil;

And, for unfelt imaginations,

They often feel a world of restless cares,

So that between their titles and low name,

There’s nothing differs but the outward fame.



Ho, who’s here?


What wouldst thou, fellow? And how cam’st thou hither?


would speak with Clarence, and  came hither on my legs.


What, so brief?


’Tis better, sir, than to be tedious. Let him see our commission, and

talk no more.



am in this commanded to delive
The noble Duke of Clarence to your hands.

will not reason what is meant hereby,

Because  will be guiltless of the meaning.

There lies the Duke asleep, and there the keys.

’ll to the King and signify to him

That thus  have resigned to you my charge.


You may, sir; ’tis a point of wisdom. Fare you well.



What, shall  stab him as he sleeps?


No. He’ll say ’twas done cowardly, when he wakes.


Why, he shall never wake until the great Judgement Day.


Why, then he’ll say we stabbed him sleeping.


The urging of that word “judgement” hath bred a kind of remorse in me.


What, art thou afraid?


Not to kill him, having a warrant, but to be damned for killing him,

from the which no warrant can defend me.


thought thou hadst been resolute.


So  am—to let him live.


’ll back to the Duke of Gloucester and tell him so.


Nay,  prithee stay a little.  hope this passionate humour will

change. It was wont to hold me but while one tells twenty.


How dost thou feel thyself now?


Faith, some certain dregs of conscience are yet within me.


Remember our reward, when the deed’s done.


Zounds, he dies!  had forgot the reward.


Where’s thy conscience now?


, in the Duke of Gloucester’s purse.


So, when he opens his purse to give us our reward, thy conscience flies

out.


’Tis no matter; let it go. There’s few or none will entertain it.


What if it come to thee again?


’ll not meddle with it; it makes a man coward.  man cannot steal but

it accuseth him; a man cannot swear but it checks him; a man cannot lie

with his neighbour’s wife but it detects him. ’Tis a blushing

shamefaced spirit that mutinies in a man’s bosom. It fills a man full

of obstacles. It made me once restore a purse of gold that by chance 

found. It beggars any man that keeps it. It is turned out of towns and

cities for a dangerous thing; and every man that means to live well

endeavours to trust to himself and live without it.


Zounds, ’tis even now at my elbow, persuading me not to kill the Duke.


Take the devil in thy mind, and believe him not. He would insinuate

with thee but to make thee sigh.


am strong-framed; he cannot prevail with me.


Spoke like a tall man that respects thy reputation. Come, shall we fall

to work?


Take him on the costard with the hilts of thy sword, and then throw him

in the malmsey-butt in the next room.


excellent device—and make a sop of him.


Soft, he wakes.


Strike!


No, we’ll reason with him.


Where art thou, keeper? Give me a cup of wine.


You shall have wine enough, my lord, anon.


In God’s name, what art thou?


man, as you are.


But not as  am, royal.


Nor you as we are, loyal.


Thy voice is thunder, but thy looks are humble.


My voice is now the King’s, my looks mine own.


How darkly and how deadly dost thou speak!

Your eyes do menace me; why look you pale?

Who sent you hither? Wherefore do you come?


To, to, to—


To murder me?


Ay, ay.


You scarcely have the hearts to tell me so,

And therefore cannot have the hearts to do it.

Wherein, my friends, have  offended you?


Offended us you have not, but the King.


shall be reconciled to him again.


Never, my lord; therefore prepare to die.


Are you drawn forth among a world of men

To slay the innocent? What is my offence?

Where is the evidence that doth accuse me?

What lawful quest have given their verdict up

Unto the frowning judge? Or who pronounced

The bitter sentence of poor Clarence’ death?

Before  be convict by course of law,

To threaten me with death is most unlawful.

charge you, as you hope to have redemption,

By Christ’s dear blood shed for our grievous sins,

That you depart, and lay no hands on me.

The deed you undertake is damnable.


What we will do, we do upon command.


And he that hath commanded is our King.


Erroneous vassals! The great King of kings

Hath in the table of his law commanded

That thou shalt do no murder. Will you then

Spurn at His edict and fulfil a man’s?

Take heed, for He holds vengeance in His hand

To hurl upon their heads that break His law.


And that same vengeance doth He hurl on thee

For false forswearing, and for murder too.

Thou didst receive the sacrament to fight

In quarrel of the house of Lancaster.


And like a traitor to the name of God

Didst break that vow, and with thy treacherous blade

Unrippedst the bowels of thy sovereign’s son.


Whom thou wast sworn to cherish and defend.


How canst thou urge God’s dreadful law to us,

When thou hast broke it in such dear degree?


Alas, for whose sake did  that ill deed?

For Edward, for my brother, for his sake.

He sends you not to murder me for this,

For in that sin he is as deep as .

If God will be avenged for the deed,

, know you yet He doth it publicly;

Take not the quarrel from His powerful arm;

He needs no indirect or lawless course

To cut off those that have offended Him.


Who made thee then a bloody ministe
When gallant-springing, brave Plantagenet,

That princely novice, was struck dead by thee?


My brother’s love, the devil, and my rage.


Thy brother’s love, our duty, and thy faults,

Provoke us hither now to slaughter thee.


If you do love my brother, hate not me.

am his brother, and  love him well.

If you are hired for meed, go back again,

And  will send you to my brother Gloucester,

Who shall reward you better for my life

Than Edward will for tidings of my death.


You are deceived. Your brother Gloucester hates you.


no, he loves me, and he holds me dear.

Go you to him from me.


Ay, so we will.


Tell him when that our princely father York

Blessed his three sons with his victorious arm,

And charged us from his soul to love each other,

He little thought of this divided friendship.

Bid Gloucester think of this, and he will weep.


Ay, millstones, as he lessoned us to weep.


, do not slander him, for he is kind.


Right, as snow in harvest. Come, you deceive yourself.

’Tis he that sends us to destroy you here.


It cannot be, for he bewept my fortune,

And hugged me in his arms, and swore with sobs

That he would labour my delivery.


Why, so he doth, when he delivers you

From this earth’s thraldom to the joys of heaven.


Make peace with God, for you must die, my lord.


Have you that holy feeling in your souls

To counsel me to make my peace with God,

And are you yet to your own souls so blind

That you will war with God by murd’ring me?

sirs, consider: they that set you on

To do this deed will hate you for the deed.


What shall we do?


Relent, and save your souls.


Relent? No, ’tis cowardly and womanish.


Not to relent is beastly, savage, devilish.

Which of you—if you were a prince’s son,

Being pent from liberty, as  am now—

If two such murderers as yourselves came to you,

Would not entreat for life? Ay, you would beg,

Were you in my distress.

My friend,  spy some pity in thy looks.

, if thine eye be not a flatterer,

Come thou on my side, and entreat for me;

begging prince what beggar pities not?


Look behind you, my lord.


Take that, and that!  If all this will not do,

’ll drown you in the malmsey-butt within.



bloody deed, and desperately dispatched.

How fain, like Pilate, would  wash my hands

Of this most grievous murder.



How now? What mean’st thou that thou help’st me not?

By heavens, the Duke shall know how slack you have been.


would he knew that  had saved his brother.

Take thou the fee, and tell him what  say,

For  repent me that the Duke is slain.



So do not . Go, coward as thou art.

Well, ’ll go hide the body in some hole

Till that the Duke give order for his burial.

And when  have my meed,  will away,

For this will out, and then  must not stay.



. London.  Room in the palace


Buckingham, Grey and others.


Why, so. Now have  done a good day’s work.

You peers, continue this united league.

every day expect an embassage

From my Redeemer, to redeem me hence;

And more at peace my soul shall part to heaven

Since  have made my friends at peace on earth.

Rivers and Hastings, take each other’s hand;

Dissemble not your hatred. Swear your love.


By heaven, my soul is purged from grudging hate,

And with my hand  seal my true heart’s love.


So thrive , as  truly swear the like.


Take heed you dally not before your King,

Lest He that is the supreme King of kings

Confound your hidden falsehood, and award

Either of you to be the other’s end.


So prosper , as  swear perfect love.


And , as  love Hastings with my heart.


Madam, yourself is not exempt from this;

Nor you, son Dorset; Buckingham, nor you.

You have been factious one against the other.

Wife, love Lord Hastings, let him kiss your hand,

And what you do, do it unfeignedly.


There, Hastings,  will never more remembe
Our former hatred, so thrive  and mine.


Dorset, embrace him; Hastings, love lord Marquess.


This interchange of love,  here protest,

Upon my part shall be inviolable.


And so swear .



Now, princely Buckingham, seal thou this league

With thy embracements to my wife’s allies,

And make me happy in your unity.


Whenever Buckingham doth turn his hate

Upon your Grace, but with all duteous love

Doth cherish you and yours, God punish me

With hate in those where  expect most love.

When  have most need to employ a friend,

And most assured that he is a friend,

Deep, hollow, treacherous, and full of guile

Be he unto me: this do  beg of God,

When  am cold in love to you or yours.



pleasing cordial, princely Buckingham,

Is this thy vow unto my sickly heart.

There wanteth now our brother Gloucester here,

To make the blessed period of this peace.


And in good time,

Here comes Sir Ratcliffe and the Duke.



Good morrow to my sovereign King and Queen;

And, princely peers, a happy time of day.


Happy indeed, as we have spent the day.

Gloucester, we have done deeds of charity,

Made peace of enmity, fair love of hate,

Between these swelling wrong-incensed peers.


blessed labour, my most sovereign lord,

Among this princely heap, if any here

By false intelligence or wrong surmise

Hold me a foe,

If  unwittingly, or in my rage,

Have aught committed that is hardly borne

By any in this presence,  desire

To reconcile me to his friendly peace.

’Tis death to me to be at enmity;

hate it, and desire all good men’s love.

First, madam,  entreat true peace of you,

Which  will purchase with my duteous service;

Of you, my noble cousin Buckingham,

If ever any grudge were lodged between us;

Of you and you, Lord Rivers and of Dorset,

That all without desert have frowned on me;

Of you, Lord Woodville and Lord Scales;—of you,

Dukes, earls, lords, gentlemen; indeed, of all.

do not know that Englishman alive

With whom my soul is any jot at odds

More than the infant that is born tonight.

thank my God for my humility.


holy day shall this be kept hereafter.

would to God all strifes were well compounded.

My sovereign lord,  do beseech your Highness

To take our brother Clarence to your grace.


Why, madam, have  offered love for this,

To be so flouted in this royal presence?

Who knows not that the gentle Duke is dead?


You do him injury to scorn his corse.


Who knows not he is dead! Who knows he is?


All-seeing heaven, what a world is this!


Look  so pale, Lord Dorset, as the rest?


Ay, my good lord, and no man in the presence

But his red colour hath forsook his cheeks.


Is Clarence dead? The order was reversed.


But he, poor man, by your first order died,

And that a winged Mercury did bear;

Some tardy cripple bore the countermand,

That came too lag to see him buried.

God grant that some, less noble and less loyal,

Nearer in bloody thoughts, and not in blood,

Deserve not worse than wretched Clarence did,

And yet go current from suspicion!



boon, my sovereign, for my service done!


prithee, peace. My soul is full of sorrow.


will not rise unless your Highness hear me.


Then say at once what is it thou requests.


The forfeit, sovereign, of my servant’s life

Who slew today a riotous gentleman

Lately attendant on the Duke of Norfolk.


Have  a tongue to doom my brother’s death,

And shall that tongue give pardon to a slave?

My brother killed no man; his fault was thought,

And yet his punishment was bitter death.

Who sued to me for him? Who, in my wrath,

Kneeled at my feet, and bid me be advised?

Who spoke of brotherhood? Who spoke of love?

Who told me how the poor soul did forsake

The mighty Warwick, and did fight for me?

Who told me, in the field at Tewksbury,

When Oxford had me down, he rescued me,

And said, “Dear brother, live, and be a king”?

Who told me, when we both lay in the field

Frozen almost to death, how he did lap me

Even in his garments, and did give himself,

All thin and naked, to the numb-cold night?

All this from my remembrance brutish wrath

Sinfully plucked, and not a man of you

Had so much grace to put it in my mind.

But when your carters or your waiting vassals

Have done a drunken slaughter, and defaced

The precious image of our dear Redeemer,

You straight are on your knees for pardon, pardon,

And , unjustly too, must grant it you.

But for my brother not a man would speak,

Nor , ungracious, speak unto myself

For him, poor soul. The proudest of you all

Have been beholding to him in his life,

Yet none of you would once beg for his life.

God,  fear Thy justice will take hold

On me, and you, and mine and yours for this!

Come, Hastings, help me to my closet.

Ah, poor Clarence!



This is the fruit of rashness. Marked you not

How that the guilty kindred of the Queen

Looked pale when they did hear of Clarence’ death?

, they did urge it still unto the King.

God will revenge it. Come, lords, will you go

To comfort Edward with our company?


We wait upon your Grace.


Another Room in the palace



Good grandam, tell us, is our father dead?


No, boy.


Why do you weep so oft, and beat your breast,

And cry “ Clarence, my unhappy son”?


Why do you look on us, and shake your head,

And call us orphans, wretches, castaways,

If that our noble father were alive?


My pretty cousins, you mistake me both.

do lament the sickness of the King,

As loath to lose him, not your father’s death.

It were lost sorrow to wail one that’s lost.


Then you conclude, my grandam, he is dead.

The King mine uncle is to blame for it.

God will revenge it, whom  will importune

With earnest prayers all to that effect.


And so will .


Peace, children, peace. The King doth love you well.

Incapable and shallow innocents,

You cannot guess who caused your father’s death.


Grandam, we can, for my good uncle Glouceste
Told me, the King, provoked to it by the Queen,

Devised impeachments to imprison him;

And when my uncle told me so, he wept,

And pitied me, and kindly kissed my cheek;

Bade me rely on him as on my father,

And he would love me dearly as his child.


Ah, that deceit should steal such gentle shape,

And with a virtuous visard hide deep vice!

He is my son, ay, and therein my shame;

Yet from my dugs he drew not this deceit.


Think you my uncle did dissemble, grandam?


Ay, boy.


cannot think it. Hark, what noise is this?


after her.


Ah, who shall hinder me to wail and weep,

To chide my fortune, and torment myself?

’ll join with black despair against my soul

And to myself become an enemy.


What means this scene of rude impatience?


To make an act of tragic violence.

Edward, my lord, thy son, our King, is dead.

Why grow the branches when the root is gone?

Why wither not the leaves that want their sap?

If you will live, lament; if die, be brief,

That our swift-winged souls may catch the King’s

Or, like obedient subjects, follow him

To his new kingdom of ne’er-changing night.


Ah, so much interest have  in thy sorrow

As  had title in thy noble husband.

have bewept a worthy husband’s death,

And lived by looking on his images;

But now two mirrors of his princely semblance

Are cracked in pieces by malignant death,

And , for comfort, have but one false glass,

That grieves me when  see my shame in him.

Thou art a widow, yet thou art a mother,

And hast the comfort of thy children left;

But death hath snatched my husband from mine arms

And plucked two crutches from my feeble hands,

Clarence and Edward. , what cause have ,

Thine being but a moiety of my moan,

To overgo thy woes and drown thy cries.


Ah, aunt, you wept not for our father’s death.

How can we aid you with our kindred tears?


Our fatherless distress was left unmoaned.

Your widow-dolour likewise be unwept!


Give me no help in lamentation.

am not barren to bring forth complaints.

All springs reduce their currents to mine eyes,

That , being governed by the watery moon,

May send forth plenteous tears to drown the world.

Ah, for my husband, for my dear Lord Edward!


Ah for our father, for our dear Lord Clarence!


Alas for both, both mine, Edward and Clarence!


What stay had  but Edward? And he’s gone.


What stay had we but Clarence? And he’s gone.


What stays had  but they? And they are gone.


Was never widow had so dear a loss.


Were never orphans had so dear a loss.


Was never mother had so dear a loss.

Alas,  am the mother of these griefs.

Their woes are parcelled, mine is general.

She for an Edward weeps, and so do ;

for a Clarence weep, so doth not she;

These babes for Clarence weep, and so do ;

for an Edward weep, so do not they.

Alas, you three, on me, threefold distressed,

Pour all your tears.  am your sorrow’s nurse,

And  will pamper it with lamentation.


Comfort, dear mother. God is much displeased

That you take with unthankfulness His doing.

In common worldly things ’tis called ungrateful

With dull unwillingness to repay a debt

Which with a bounteous hand was kindly lent;

Much more to be thus opposite with heaven,

For it requires the royal debt it lent you.


Madam, bethink you, like a careful mother,

Of the young prince your son. Send straight for him;

Let him be crowned; in him your comfort lives.

Drown desperate sorrow in dead Edward’s grave,

And plant your joys in living Edward’s throne.


Ratcliffe.


Sister, have comfort. All of us have cause

To wail the dimming of our shining star,

But none can help our harms by wailing them.

Madam my mother,  do cry you mercy;

did not see your Grace. Humbly on my knee

crave your blessing.



God bless thee, and put meekness in thy breast,

Love, charity, obedience, and true duty.


Amen.  And make me die a good old man!

That is the butt end of a mother’s blessing;

marvel that her Grace did leave it out.


You cloudy princes and heart-sorrowing peers

That bear this heavy mutual load of moan,

Now cheer each other in each other’s love.

Though we have spent our harvest of this king,

We are to reap the harvest of his son.

The broken rancour of your high-swoll’n hates,

But lately splintered, knit, and joined together,

Must gently be preserved, cherished, and kept.

Me seemeth good that with some little train,

Forthwith from Ludlow the young Prince be fet

Hither to London, to be crowned our King.


Why with some little train, my Lord of Buckingham?


Marry, my lord, lest by a multitude

The new-healed wound of malice should break out,

Which would be so much the more dangerous

By how much the estate is green and yet ungoverned.

Where every horse bears his commanding rein

And may direct his course as please himself,

As well the fear of harm as harm apparent,

In my opinion, ought to be prevented.


hope the King made peace with all of us;

And the compact is firm and true in me.


And so in me, and so,  think, in all.

Yet since it is but green, it should be put

To no apparent likelihood of breach,

Which haply by much company might be urged.

Therefore  say with noble Buckingham

That it is meet so few should fetch the Prince.


And so say .


Then be it so, and go we to determine

Who they shall be that straight shall post to Ludlow.

Madam, and you, my sister, will you go

To give your censures in this business?



My lord, whoever journeys to the Prince,

For God’s sake, let not us two stay at home.

For by the way ’ll sort occasion,

As index to the story we late talked of,

To part the Queen’s proud kindred from the Prince.


My other self, my counsel’s consistory,

My oracle, my prophet, my dear cousin,

, as a child, will go by thy direction.

Toward Ludlow then, for we’ll not stay behind.


London.  street



Good morrow, neighbour, whither away so fast?


promise you,  scarcely know myself.

Hear you the news abroad?


Yes, that the King is dead.


Ill news, by’r Lady; seldom comes the better.

fear,  fear ’twill prove a giddy world.



Neighbours, God speed.


Give you good morrow, sir.


Doth the news hold of good King Edward’s death?


Ay, sir, it is too true, God help the while.


Then, masters, look to see a troublous world.


No, no; by God’s good grace, his son shall reign.


Woe to that land that’s governed by a child.


In him there is a hope of government,

Which, in his nonage, council under him,

And, in his full and ripened years, himself,

No doubt shall then, and till then, govern well.


So stood the state when Henry the Sixth

Was crowned in Paris but at nine months old.


Stood the state so? No, no, good friends, God wot.

For then this land was famously enriched

With politic grave counsel; then the King

Had virtuous uncles to protect his Grace.


Why, so hath this, both by his father and mother.


Better it were they all came by his father,

Or by his father there were none at all,

For emulation who shall now be nearest

Will touch us all too near, if God prevent not.

, full of danger is the Duke of Gloucester,

And the Queen’s sons and brothers haught and proud;

And were they to be ruled, and not to rule,

This sickly land might solace as before.


Come, come, we fear the worst; all will be well.


When clouds are seen, wise men put on their cloaks;

When great leaves fall, then winter is at hand;

When the sun sets, who doth not look for night?

Untimely storms make men expect a dearth.

All may be well; but, if God sort it so,

’Tis more than we deserve or  expect.


Truly, the hearts of men are full of fear.

You cannot reason almost with a man

That looks not heavily and full of dread.


Before the days of change, still is it so.

By a divine instinct men’s minds mistrust

Ensuing danger, as by proof we see

The water swell before a boist’rous storm.

But leave it all to God. Whither away?


Marry, we were sent for to the Justices.


And so was . ’ll bear you company.


London.  Room in the Palace


and the Duchess of York.


Last night,  hear, they lay at Stony Stratford,

And at Northampton they do rest tonight.

Tomorrow or next day they will be here.


long with all my heart to see the Prince.

hope he is much grown since last  saw him.


But  hear no; they say my son of York

Has almost overta’en him in his growth.


Ay, mother, but  would not have it so.


Why, my good cousin? It is good to grow.


Grandam, one night as we did sit at supper,

My uncle Rivers talked how  did grow

More than my brother. “Ay,” quoth my uncle Gloucester,

“Small herbs have grace; great weeds do grow apace.”

And since, methinks  would not grow so fast,

Because sweet flowers are slow and weeds make haste.


Good faith, good faith, the saying did not hold

In him that did object the same to thee!

He was the wretched’st thing when he was young,

So long a-growing and so leisurely,

That if his rule were true, he should be gracious.


And so no doubt he is, my gracious madam.


hope he is, but yet let mothers doubt.


Now, by my troth, if  had been remembered,

could have given my uncle’s Grace a flout

To touch his growth nearer than he touched mine.


How, my young York?  prithee let me hear it.


Marry, they say my uncle grew so fast

That he could gnaw a crust at two hours old.

’Twas full two years ere  could get a tooth.

Grandam, this would have been a biting jest.


prithee, pretty York, who told thee this?


Grandam, his nurse.


His nurse? Why she was dead ere thou wast born.


If ’twere not she,  cannot tell who told me.


parlous boy! Go to, you are too shrewd.


Good madam, be not angry with the child.


Pitchers have ears.



Here comes a messenger. What news?


Such news, my lord, as grieves me to report.


How doth the Prince?


Well, madam, and in health.


What is thy news?


Lord Rivers and Lord Grey are sent to Pomfret,

And, with them Sir Thomas Vaughan, prisoners.


Who hath committed them?


The mighty Dukes, Gloucester and Buckingham.


For what offence?


The sum of all  can,  have disclosed.

Why or for what the nobles were committed

Is all unknown to me, my gracious lord.


Ah me!  see the ruin of my house.

The tiger now hath seized the gentle hind;

Insulting tyranny begins to jut

Upon the innocent and aweless throne.

Welcome, destruction, blood, and massacre;

see, as in a map, the end of all.


Accursed and unquiet wrangling days,

How many of you have mine eyes beheld?

My husband lost his life to get the crown,

And often up and down my sons were tossed

For me to joy and weep their gain and loss.

And being seated, and domestic broils

Clean over-blown, themselves, the conquerors

Make war upon themselves, brother to brother,

Blood to blood, self against self. , preposterous

And frantic outrage, end thy damned spleen,

Or let me die, to look on earth no more.


Come, come, my boy. We will to sanctuary.

Madam, farewell.


Stay,  will go with you.


You have no cause.


My gracious lady, go,

And thither bear your treasure and your goods.

For my part, ’ll resign unto your Grace

The seal  keep; and so betide to me

As well  tender you and all of yours.

Go, ’ll conduct you to the sanctuary.



. London.  street


Cardinal Bourchier, Catesby and others.


Welcome, sweet Prince, to London, to your chamber.


Welcome, dear cousin, my thoughts’ sovereign.

The weary way hath made you melancholy.


No, uncle, but our crosses on the way

Have made it tedious, wearisome, and heavy.

want more uncles here to welcome me.


Sweet prince, the untainted virtue of your years

Hath not yet dived into the world’s deceit,

Nor more can you distinguish of a man

Than of his outward show, which, God He knows,

Seldom or never jumpeth with the heart.

Those uncles which you want were dangerous;

Your Grace attended to their sugared words

But looked not on the poison of their hearts.

God keep you from them, and from such false friends!


God keep me from false friends, but they were none.


My lord, the Mayor of London comes to greet you.



God bless your Grace with health and happy days!


thank you, good my lord, and thank you all.

thought my mother and my brother York

Would long ere this have met us on the way.

Fie, what a slug is Hastings, that he comes not

To tell us whether they will come or no!



And in good time, here comes the sweating lord.


Welcome, my lord. What, will our mother come?


On what occasion God He knows, not ,

The Queen your mother and your brother York

Have taken sanctuary. The tender prince

Would fain have come with me to meet your Grace,

But by his mother was perforce withheld.


Fie, what an indirect and peevish course

Is this of hers? Lord cardinal, will your Grace

Persuade the Queen to send the Duke of York

Unto his princely brother presently?

If she deny, Lord Hastings, go with him,

And from her jealous arms pluck him perforce.


My Lord of Buckingham, if my weak oratory

Can from his mother win the Duke of York,

Anon expect him here; but if she be obdurate

To mild entreaties, God in heaven forbid

We should infringe the holy privilege

Of blessed sanctuary! Not for all this land

Would  be guilty of so deep a sin.


You are too senseless-obstinate, my lord,

Too ceremonious and traditional.

Weigh it but with the grossness of this age,

You break not sanctuary in seizing him.

The benefit thereof is always granted

To those whose dealings have deserved the place

And those who have the wit to claim the place.

This prince hath neither claimed it nor deserved it

And therefore, in mine opinion, cannot have it.

Then taking him from thence that is not there,

You break no privilege nor charter there.

Oft have  heard of sanctuary-men,

But sanctuary children, never till now.


My lord, you shall o’errule my mind for once.

Come on, Lord Hastings, will you go with me?


go, my lord.


Good lords, make all the speedy haste you may.


Say, uncle Gloucester, if our brother come,

Where shall we sojourn till our coronation?


Where it seems best unto your royal self.

If  may counsel you, some day or two

Your Highness shall repose you at the Tower,

Then where you please and shall be thought most fit

For your best health and recreation.


do not like the Tower, of any place.

Did Julius Caesar build that place, my lord?


He did, my gracious lord, begin that place,

Which, since, succeeding ages have re-edified.


Is it upon record, or else reported

Successively from age to age, he built it?


Upon record, my gracious lord.


But say, my lord, it were not registered,

Methinks the truth should live from age to age,

As ’twere retailed to all posterity,

Even to the general all-ending day.


So wise so young, they say, do never live long.


What say you, uncle?


say, without characters, fame lives long.

Thus, like the formal Vice, Iniquity,

moralize two meanings in one word.


That Julius Caesar was a famous man.

With what his valour did enrich his wit,

His wit set down to make his valour live;

Death makes no conquest of this conqueror,

For now he lives in fame, though not in life.

’ll tell you what, my cousin Buckingham.


What, my gracious lord?


An if  live until  be a man,

’ll win our ancient right in France again,

Or die a soldier, as  lived a king.


Short summers lightly have a forward spring.



Now, in good time here comes the Duke of York.


Richard of York, how fares our loving brother?


Well, my dread lord—so must  call you now.


Ay brother, to our grief, as it is yours.

Too late he died that might have kept that title,

Which by his death hath lost much majesty.


How fares our cousin, noble lord of York?


thank you, gentle uncle. , my lord,

You said that idle weeds are fast in growth.

The Prince my brother hath outgrown me far.


He hath, my lord.


And therefore is he idle?


, my fair cousin,  must not say so.


Then he is more beholding to you than .


He may command me as my sovereign,

But you have power in me as in a kinsman.


pray you, uncle, give me this dagger.


My dagger, little cousin? With all my heart.


beggar, brother?


Of my kind uncle, that  know will give,

And being but a toy, which is no grief to give.


greater gift than that ’ll give my cousin.


greater gift? , that’s the sword to it.


Ay, gentle cousin, were it light enough.


, then  see you will part but with light gifts;

In weightier things you’ll say a beggar nay.


It is too heavy for your Grace to wear.


weigh it lightly, were it heavier.


What, would you have my weapon, little lord?


would, that  might thank you as you call me.


How?


Little.


My lord of York will still be cross in talk.

Uncle, your Grace knows how to bear with him.


You mean, to bear me, not to bear with me.

Uncle, my brother mocks both you and me.

Because that  am little, like an ape,

He thinks that you should bear me on your shoulders.


With what a sharp-provided wit he reasons!

To mitigate the scorn he gives his uncle,

He prettily and aptly taunts himself.

So cunning and so young is wonderful.


My lord, wil’t please you pass along?

Myself and my good cousin Buckingham

Will to your mother, to entreat of he
To meet you at the Tower and welcome you.


What, will you go unto the Tower, my lord?


My Lord Protector needs will have it so.


shall not sleep in quiet at the Tower.


Why, what should you fear?


Marry, my uncle Clarence’ angry ghost.

My grandam told me he was murdered there.


fear no uncles dead.


Nor none that live,  hope.


An if they live,  hope  need not fear.

But come, my lord. With a heavy heart,

Thinking on them, go  unto the Tower.

[_A Sennet. Exeunt Prince Edward, York, Hastings, Dorset and all but

Richard, Buckingham and Catesby._]


Think you, my lord, this little prating York

Was not incensed by his subtle mothe
To taunt and scorn you thus opprobriously?


No doubt, no doubt. , ’tis a parlous boy,

Bold, quick, ingenious, forward, capable.

He is all the mother’s, from the top to toe.


Well, let them rest. Come hither, Catesby.

Thou art sworn as deeply to effect what we intend

As closely to conceal what we impart.

Thou know’st our reasons urged upon the way.

What think’st thou? Is it not an easy matte
To make William Lord Hastings of our mind

For the instalment of this noble Duke

In the seat royal of this famous isle?


He for his father’s sake so loves the Prince

That he will not be won to aught against him.


What think’st thou then of Stanley? Will not he?


He will do all in all as Hastings doth.


Well then, no more but this: go, gentle Catesby,

And, as it were far off, sound thou Lord Hastings

How he doth stand affected to our purpose,

And summon him tomorrow to the Towe
To sit about the coronation.

If thou dost find him tractable to us,

Encourage him, and tell him all our reasons.

If he be leaden, icy, cold, unwilling,

Be thou so too, and so break off the talk,

And give us notice of his inclination;

For we tomorrow hold divided councils,

Wherein thyself shalt highly be employed.


Commend me to Lord William. Tell him, Catesby,

His ancient knot of dangerous adversaries

Tomorrow are let blood at Pomfret Castle,

And bid my lord, for joy of this good news,

Give Mistress Shore one gentle kiss the more.


Good Catesby, go effect this business soundly.


My good lords both, with all the heed  can.


Shall we hear from you, Catesby, ere we sleep?


You shall, my lord.


At Crosby Place, there shall you find us both.



Now, my lord, what shall we do if we perceive

Lord Hastings will not yield to our complots?


Chop off his head, man; somewhat we will do.

And look when  am king, claim thou of me

The earldom of Hereford, and all the movables

Whereof the King my brother was possessed.


’ll claim that promise at your Grace’s hand.


And look to have it yielded with all kindness.

Come, let us sup betimes, that afterwards

We may digest our complots in some form.


Before Lord Hastings’ house



My lord, my lord!



Who knocks?


One from the Lord Stanley.


What is’t o’clock?


Upon the stroke of four.



Cannot my Lord Stanley sleep these tedious nights?


So it appears by that  have to say.

First, he commends him to your noble self.


What then?


Then certifies your lordship that this night

He dreamt the boar had razed off his helm.

Besides, he says there are two councils kept,

And that may be determined at the one

Which may make you and him to rue at th’ other.

Therefore he sends to know your lordship’s pleasure,

If you will presently take horse with him

And with all speed post with him toward the north,

To shun the danger that his soul divines.


Go, fellow, go. Return unto thy lord;

Bid him not fear the separated council.

His honour and myself are at the one,

And at the other is my good friend Catesby,

Where nothing can proceed that toucheth us

Whereof  shall not have intelligence.

Tell him his fears are shallow, without instance.

And for his dreams,  wonder he’s so simple

To trust the mockery of unquiet slumbers.

To fly the boar before the boar pursues

Were to incense the boar to follow us,

And make pursuit where he did mean no chase.

Go, bid thy master rise and come to me,

And we will both together to the Tower,

Where he shall see the boar will use us kindly.


’ll go, my lord, and tell him what you say.




Many good morrows to my noble lord.


Good morrow, Catesby; you are early stirring.

What news, what news in this our tott’ring state?


It is a reeling world indeed, my lord,

And  believe will never stand upright

Till Richard wear the garland of the realm.


How, wear the garland? Dost thou mean the crown?


Ay, my good lord.


’ll have this crown of mine cut from my shoulders

Before ’ll see the crown so foul misplaced.

But canst thou guess that he doth aim at it?


Ay, on my life, and hopes to find you forward

Upon his party for the gain thereof;

And thereupon he sends you this good news,

That this same very day your enemies,

The kindred of the Queen, must die at Pomfret.


Indeed,  am no mourner for that news,

Because they have been still my adversaries.

But that ’ll give my voice on Richard’s side

To bar my master’s heirs in true descent,

God knows  will not do it, to the death.


God keep your lordship in that gracious mind.


But  shall laugh at this a twelve-month hence,

That they which brought me in my master’s hate,

live to look upon their tragedy.

Well, Catesby, ere a fortnight make me olde
’ll send some packing that yet think not on’t.


’Tis a vile thing to die, my gracious lord,

When men are unprepared and look not for it.


monstrous, monstrous! And so falls it out

With Rivers, Vaughan, Grey; and so ’twill do

With some men else that think themselves as safe

As thou and , who, as thou know’st, are dea
To princely Richard and to Buckingham.


The Princes both make high account of you—

For they account his head upon the Bridge.


know they do, and  have well deserved it.


Come on, come on. Where is your boar-spear, man?

Fear you the boar, and go so unprovided?


My lord, good morrow; good morrow, Catesby.

You may jest on, but, by the Holy Rood,

do not like these several councils, .


My lord,  hold my life as dear as you do yours,

And never in my days,  do protest,

Was it so precious to me as ’tis now.

Think you, but that  know our state secure,

would be so triumphant as  am?


The lords at Pomfret, when they rode from London,

Were jocund and supposed their states were sure,

And they indeed had no cause to mistrust;

But yet you see how soon the day o’ercast.

This sudden stab of rancour  misdoubt;

Pray God,  say,  prove a needless coward.

What, shall we toward the Tower? The day is spent.


Come, come. Have with you. Wot you what, my lord?

Today the lords you talked of are beheaded.


They, for their truth, might better wear their heads

Than some that have accused them wear their hats.

But come, my lord, let’s away.



Go on before; ’ll talk with this good fellow.


How now, sirrah? How goes the world with thee?


The better that your lordship please to ask.


tell thee, man, ’tis better with me now

Than when thou met’st me last where now we meet.

Then was  going prisoner to the Tower,

By the suggestion of the Queen’s allies.

But now,  tell thee—keep it to thyself—

This day those enemies are put to death,

And  in better state than e’er  was.


God hold it, to your honour’s good content!


Gramercy, fellow. There, drink that for me.



thank your honour.




Well met, my lord;  am glad to see your honour.


thank thee, good Sir John, with all my heart.

am in your debt for your last exercise.

Come the next sabbath, and  will content you.



’ll wait upon your lordship.



What, talking with a priest, Lord Chamberlain?

Your friends at Pomfret, they do need the priest;

Your honour hath no shriving work in hand.


Good faith, and when  met this holy man,

The men you talk of came into my mind.

What, go you toward the Tower?


do, my lord, but long  cannot stay there.

shall return before your lordship thence.


Nay, like enough, for  stay dinner there.


And supper too, although thou knowest it not.

Come, will you go?


’ll wait upon your lordship.


Pomfret. Before the Castle


Grey and Vaughan to death at Pomfret.


Sir Richard Ratcliffe, let me tell thee this:

Today shalt thou behold a subject die

For truth, for duty, and for loyalty.


God bless the Prince from all the pack of you!

knot you are of damned bloodsuckers.


You live that shall cry woe for this hereafter.


Dispatch. The limit of your lives is out.


Pomfret, Pomfret!  thou bloody prison,

Fatal and ominous to noble peers!

Within the guilty closure of thy walls

Richard the Second here was hacked to death;

And, for more slander to thy dismal seat,

We give to thee our guiltless blood to drink.


Now Margaret’s curse is fall’n upon our heads,

When she exclaimed on Hastings, you, and ,

For standing by when Richard stabbed her son.


Then cursed she Richard, then cursed she Buckingham,

Then cursed she Hastings. , remember, God,

To hear her prayer for them, as now for us!

And for my sister and her princely sons,

Be satisfied, dear God, with our true blood,

Which, as thou know’st, unjustly must be spilt.


Make haste. The hour of death is expiate.


Come, Grey, come, Vaughan, let us here embrace.

Farewell, until we meet again in heaven.


London.  Room in the Towe

Norfolk, Ratcliffe, Lovell with others, at a table.


Now, noble peers, the cause why we are met

Is to determine of the coronation.

In God’s name speak. When is the royal day?


Is all things ready for that royal time?


It is, and wants but nomination.


Tomorrow, then,  judge a happy day.


Who knows the Lord Protector’s mind herein?

Who is most inward with the noble Duke?


Your Grace, we think, should soonest know his mind.


We know each other’s faces; for our hearts,

He knows no more of mine than  of yours,

Or  of his, my lord, than you of mine.

Lord Hastings, you and he are near in love.


thank his Grace,  know he loves me well;

But for his purpose in the coronation

have not sounded him, nor he delivered

His gracious pleasure any way therein.

But you, my honourable lords, may name the time,

And in the Duke’s behalf ’ll give my voice,

Which  presume he’ll take in gentle part.



In happy time, here comes the Duke himself.


My noble lords and cousins all, good morrow.

have been long a sleeper; but  trust

My absence doth neglect no great design

Which by my presence might have been concluded.


Had you not come upon your cue, my lord,

William Lord Hastings had pronounced your part—

mean your voice for crowning of the King.


Than my Lord Hastings no man might be bolder.

His lordship knows me well and loves me well.

My lord of Ely, when  was last in Holborn

saw good strawberries in your garden there;

do beseech you, send for some of them.


Marry, and will, my lord, with all my heart.



Cousin of Buckingham, a word with you.


Catesby hath sounded Hastings in our business,

And finds the testy gentleman so hot

That he will lose his head ere give consent

His master’s child, as worshipfully he terms it,

Shall lose the royalty of England’s throne.


Withdraw yourself awhile. ’ll go with you.



We have not yet set down this day of triumph.

Tomorrow, in my judgement, is too sudden,

For  myself am not so well provided

As else  would be, were the day prolonged.



Where is my lord the Duke of Gloucester?

have sent for these strawberries.


His Grace looks cheerfully and smooth this morning.

There’s some conceit or other likes him well

When that he bids good morrow with such spirit.

think there’s never a man in Christendom

Can lesser hide his love or hate than he,

For by his face straight shall you know his heart.


What of his heart perceive you in his face

By any livelihood he showed today?


Marry, that with no man here he is offended,

For were he, he had shown it in his looks.



pray you all, tell me what they deserve

That do conspire my death with devilish plots

Of damned witchcraft, and that have prevailed

Upon my body with their hellish charms?


The tender love  bear your Grace, my lord,

Makes me most forward in this princely presence

To doom th’ offenders, whosoe’er they be.

say, my lord, they have deserved death.


Then be your eyes the witness of their evil.

Look how  am bewitched! Behold, mine arm

Is like a blasted sapling withered up!

And this is Edward’s wife, that monstrous witch,

Consorted with that harlot, strumpet Shore,

That by their witchcraft thus have marked me.


If they have done this deed, my noble lord—


If? Thou protector of this damned strumpet,

Talk’st thou to me of “ifs”? Thou art a traitor.

Off with his head! Now by Saint Paul  swea
will not dine until  see the same.

Lovell and Ratcliffe, look that it be done.

The rest that love me, rise and follow me.



Woe, woe, for England! Not a whit for me,

For , too fond, might have prevented this.

Stanley did dream the boar did raze his helm,

And  did scorn it and disdain to fly.

Three times today my foot-cloth horse did stumble,

And started when he looked upon the Tower,

As loath to bear me to the slaughter-house.

, now  need the priest that spake to me;

now repent  told the pursuivant,

As too triumphing, how mine enemies

Today at Pomfret bloodily were butchered,

And  myself secure in grace and favour.

Margaret, Margaret, now thy heavy curse

Is lighted on poor Hastings’ wretched head.


Come, come, dispatch. The Duke would be at dinner:

Make a short shrift. He longs to see your head.


momentary grace of mortal men,

Which we more hunt for than the grace of God!

Who builds his hope in air of your good looks

Lives like a drunken sailor on a mast,

Ready with every nod to tumble down

Into the fatal bowels of the deep.


Come, come, dispatch. ’Tis bootless to exclaim.


bloody Richard! Miserable England,

prophesy the fearfull’st time to thee

That ever wretched age hath looked upon.

Come, lead me to the block. Bear him my head.

They smile at me who shortly shall be dead.


. London. The Tower Walls



Come, cousin, canst thou quake and change thy colour,

Murder thy breath in middle of a word,

And then again begin, and stop again,

As if thou were distraught and mad with terror?


Tut,  can counterfeit the deep tragedian;

Speak, and look back, and pry on every side,

Tremble and start at wagging of a straw,

Intending deep suspicion. Ghastly looks

Are at my service, like enforced smiles,

And both are ready in their offices,

At anytime to grace my stratagems.

But what, is Catesby gone?


He is; and, see, he brings the Mayor along.



Lord Mayor—


Look to the drawbridge there!


Hark, a drum.


Catesby, o’erlook the walls.


Lord Mayor, the reason we have sent—


Look back! Defend thee, here are enemies.


God and our innocence defend and guard us!



Be patient, they are friends, Ratcliffe and Lovell.


Here is the head of that ignoble traitor,

The dangerous and unsuspected Hastings.


So dear  loved the man that  must weep.

took him for the plainest harmless creature

That breathed upon the earth a Christian;

Made him my book, wherein my soul recorded

The history of all her secret thoughts.

So smooth he daubed his vice with show of virtue

That, his apparent open guilt omitted—

mean his conversation with Shore’s wife—

He lived from all attainder of suspects.


Well, well, he was the covert’st sheltered traito
That ever lived.—

Would you imagine, or almost believe,

Were’t not that by great preservation

We live to tell it, that the subtle traito
This day had plotted, in the council-house,

To murder me and my good lord of Gloucester?


Had he done so?


What, think you we are Turks or Infidels?

Or that we would, against the form of law,

Proceed thus rashly in the villain’s death,

But that the extreme peril of the case,

The peace of England, and our persons’ safety,

Enforced us to this execution?


Now, fair befall you! He deserved his death,

And your good Graces both have well proceeded,

To warn false traitors from the like attempts.


never looked for better at his hands

After he once fell in with Mistress Shore.

Yet had we not determined he should die

Until your lordship came to see his end

Which now the loving haste of these our friends,

Something against our meanings, have prevented,

Because, my lord, we would have had you heard

The traitor speak, and timorously confess

The manner and the purpose of his treasons,

That you might well have signified the same

Unto the citizens, who haply may

Misconster us in him, and wail his death.


But, my good lord, your Grace’s word shall serve

As well as  had seen and heard him speak;

And do not doubt, right noble princes both,

But ’ll acquaint our duteous citizens

With all your just proceedings in this case.


And to that end we wished your lordship here,

’ avoid the censures of the carping world.


But since you come too late of our intent,

Yet witness what you hear we did intend.

And so, my good Lord Mayor, we bid farewell.



Go, after, after, cousin Buckingham.

The Mayor towards Guildhall hies him in all post.

There, at your meet’st advantage of the time,

Infer the bastardy of Edward’s children;

Tell them how Edward put to death a citizen

Only for saying he would make his son

Heir to the Crown—meaning indeed his house,

Which, by the sign thereof, was termed so.

Moreover, urge his hateful luxury

And bestial appetite in change of lust,

Which stretched unto their servants, daughters, wives,

Even where his raging eye or savage heart,

Without control, lusted to make a prey.

Nay, for a need, thus far come near my person:

Tell them, when that my mother went with child

Of that insatiate Edward, noble York

My princely father then had wars in France,

And, by true computation of the time,

Found that the issue was not his begot;

Which well appeared in his lineaments,

Being nothing like the noble Duke, my father.

Yet touch this sparingly, as ’twere far off;

Because, my lord, you know my mother lives.


Doubt not, my lord, ’ll play the orato
As if the golden fee for which  plead

Were for myself. And so, my lord, adieu.


If you thrive well, bring them to Baynard’s Castle,

Where you shall find me well accompanied

With reverend fathers and well-learned bishops.


go; and towards three or four o’clock

Look for the news that the Guildhall affords.



Go, Lovell, with all speed to Doctor Shaa.

Go thou to Friar Penker; bid them both

Meet me within this hour at Baynard’s Castle.


Now will  go to take some privy orde
To draw the brats of Clarence out of sight,

And to give order that no manner person

Have any time recourse unto the Princes.


London.  street



Here is the indictment of the good Lord Hastings,

Which in a set hand fairly is engrossed,

That it may be today read o’er in Paul’s.

And mark how well the sequel hangs together:

Eleven hours  have spent to write it over,

For yesternight by Catesby was it sent me;

The precedent was full as long a-doing

And yet within these five hours Hastings lived,

Untainted, unexamined, free, at liberty.

Here’s a good world the while! Who is so gross

That cannot see this palpable device?

Yet who so bold but says he sees it not?

Bad is the world, and all will come to naught

When such ill dealing must be seen in thought.


London. Court of Baynard’s Castle



How now, how now? What say the citizens?


Now, by the holy mother of our Lord,

The citizens are mum, say not a word.


Touched you the bastardy of Edward’s children?


did; with his contract with Lady Lucy,

And his contract by deputy in France;

Th’ insatiate greediness of his desire,

And his enforcement of the city wives;

His tyranny for trifles; his own bastardy,

As being got, your father then in France,

And his resemblance, being not like the Duke.

Withal,  did infer your lineaments,

Being the right idea of your father,

Both in your form and nobleness of mind;

Laid open all your victories in Scotland,

Your discipline in war, wisdom in peace,

Your bounty, virtue, fair humility;

Indeed, left nothing fitting for your purpose

Untouched or slightly handled in discourse.

And when mine oratory drew toward end,

bid them that did love their country’s good

Cry “God save Richard, England’s royal King!”


And did they so?


No, so God help me, they spake not a word,

But, like dumb statues or breathing stones,

Stared each on other, and looked deadly pale.

Which when  saw,  reprehended them,

And asked the Mayor what meant this wilful silence.

His answer was, the people were not used

To be spoke to but by the Recorder.

Then he was urged to tell my tale again:

“Thus saith the Duke, thus hath the Duke inferred”

But nothing spoke in warrant from himself.

When he had done, some followers of mine own,

At lower end of the hall, hurled up their caps,

And some ten voices cried, “God save King Richard!”

And thus  took the vantage of those few.

“Thanks, gentle citizens and friends,” quoth ;

“This general applause and cheerful shout

Argues your wisdoms and your love to Richard.”

And even here brake off and came away.


What, tongueless blocks were they! Would they not speak?

Will not the Mayor then and his brethren, come?


The mayor is here at hand. Intend some fear;

Be not you spoke with but by mighty suit.

And look you get a prayer-book in your hand,

And stand between two churchmen, good my lord,

For on that ground ’ll make a holy descant.

And be not easily won to our requests.

Play the maid’s part: still answer nay, and take it.


go, and if you plead as well for them

As  can say nay to thee for myself,

No doubt we bring it to a happy issue.


Go, go, up to the leads, the Lord Mayor knocks.



Welcome, my lord.  dance attendance here.

think the Duke will not be spoke withal.


Now, Catesby, what says your lord to my request?


He doth entreat your Grace, my noble lord,

To visit him tomorrow or next day.

He is within, with two right reverend fathers,

Divinely bent to meditation;

And in no worldly suits would he be moved

To draw him from his holy exercise.


Return, good Catesby, to the gracious Duke;

Tell him myself, the Mayor and aldermen,

In deep designs, in matter of great moment,

No less importing than our general good,

Are come to have some conference with his Grace.


’ll signify so much unto him straight.



Ah ha, my lord, this prince is not an Edward!

He is not lolling on a lewd love-bed,

But on his knees at meditation;

Not dallying with a brace of courtesans,

But meditating with two deep divines;

Not sleeping, to engross his idle body,

But praying, to enrich his watchful soul.

Happy were England would this virtuous prince

Take on his Grace the sovereignty thereof.

But sure  fear we shall not win him to it.


Marry, God defend his Grace should say us nay!


fear he will. Here Catesby comes again.


Now, Catesby, what says his Grace?


He wonders to what end you have assembled

Such troops of citizens to come to him,

His Grace not being warned thereof before.

He fears, my lord, you mean no good to him.


Sorry  am my noble cousin should

Suspect me that  mean no good to him.

By heaven, we come to him in perfect love,

And so once more return and tell his Grace.


When holy and devout religious men

Are at their beads, ’tis much to draw them thence,

So sweet is zealous contemplation.



See where his Grace stands ’tween two clergymen!


Two props of virtue for a Christian prince,

To stay him from the fall of vanity;

And, see, a book of prayer in his hand,

True ornaments to know a holy man.

Famous Plantagenet, most gracious Prince,

Lend favourable ear to our requests,

And pardon us the interruption

Of thy devotion and right Christian zeal.


My lord, there needs no such apology.

do beseech your Grace to pardon me,

Who, earnest in the service of my God,

Deferred the visitation of my friends.

But, leaving this, what is your Grace’s pleasure?


Even that,  hope, which pleaseth God above,

And all good men of this ungoverned isle.


do suspect  have done some offence

That seems disgracious in the city’s eye,

And that you come to reprehend my ignorance.


You have, my lord. Would it might please your Grace,

On our entreaties, to amend your fault.


Else wherefore breathe  in a Christian land?


Know then, it is your fault that you resign

The supreme seat, the throne majestical,

The sceptered office of your ancestors,

Your state of fortune, and your due of birth,

The lineal glory of your royal house,

To the corruption of a blemished stock;

Whiles in the mildness of your sleepy thoughts,

Which here we waken to our country’s good,

The noble isle doth want her proper limbs;

Her face defaced with scars of infamy,

Her royal stock graft with ignoble plants,

And almost shouldered in the swallowing gulf

Of dark forgetfulness and deep oblivion;

Which to recure, we heartily solicit

Your gracious self to take on you the charge

And kingly government of this your land,

Not as Protector, steward, substitute,

Or lowly factor for another’s gain,

But as successively, from blood to blood,

Your right of birth, your empery, your own.

For this, consorted with the citizens,

Your very worshipful and loving friends,

And by their vehement instigation,

In this just cause come  to move your Grace.


cannot tell if to depart in silence

Or bitterly to speak in your reproof

Best fitteth my degree or your condition.

If not to answer, you might haply think

Tongue-tied ambition, not replying, yielded

To bear the golden yoke of sovereignty,

Which fondly you would here impose on me;

If to reprove you for this suit of yours,

So seasoned with your faithful love to me,

Then, on the other side,  checked my friends.

Therefore, to speak, and to avoid the first,

And then, in speaking, not to incur the last,

Definitively thus  answer you:

Your love deserves my thanks, but my desert

Unmeritable shuns your high request.

First, if all obstacles were cut away,

And that my path were even to the crown

As the ripe revenue and due of birth,

Yet so much is my poverty of spirit,

So mighty and so many my defects,

That  would rather hide me from my greatness,

Being a bark to brook no mighty sea,

Than in my greatness covet to be hid,

And in the vapour of my glory smothered.

But, God be thanked, there is no need of me,

And much  need to help you, were there need.

The royal tree hath left us royal fruit,

Which, mellowed by the stealing hours of time,

Will well become the seat of majesty,

And make, no doubt, us happy by his reign.

On him  lay that you would lay on me,

The right and fortune of his happy stars,

Which God defend that  should wring from him.


My lord, this argues conscience in your Grace;

But the respects thereof are nice and trivial,

All circumstances well considered.

You say that Edward is your brother’s son;

So say we too, but not by Edward’s wife.

For first was he contract to Lady Lucy

Your mother lives a witness to his vow,

And afterward by substitute betrothed

To Bona, sister to the King of France.

These both put off, a poor petitioner,

care-crazed mother to a many sons,

beauty-waning and distressed widow,

Even in the afternoon of her best days,

Made prize and purchase of his wanton eye,

Seduced the pitch and height of his degree

To base declension and loathed bigamy.

By her, in his unlawful bed, he got

This Edward, whom our manners call the Prince.

More bitterly could  expostulate,

Save that, for reverence to some alive,

give a sparing limit to my tongue.

Then, good my lord, take to your royal self

This proffered benefit of dignity,

If not to bless us and the land withal,

Yet to draw forth your noble ancestry

From the corruption of abusing times

Unto a lineal true-derived course.


Do, good my lord. Your citizens entreat you.


Refuse not, mighty lord, this proffered love.


, make them joyful; grant their lawful suit.


Alas, why would you heap those cares on me?

am unfit for state and majesty.

do beseech you, take it not amiss;

cannot, nor  will not, yield to you.


If you refuse it, as in love and zeal

Loath to depose the child, your brother’s son—

As well we know your tenderness of heart

And gentle, kind, effeminate remorse,

Which we have noted in you to your kindred,

And equally indeed to all estates—

Yet know, whe’er you accept our suit or no,

Your brother’s son shall never reign our king,

But we will plant some other in the throne,

To the disgrace and downfall of your house.

And in this resolution here we leave you.

Come, citizens; zounds, ’ll entreat no more.



Call him again, sweet Prince; accept their suit.

If you deny them, all the land will rue it.


Will you enforce me to a world of cares?

Call them again.  am not made of stones,

But penetrable to your kind entreaties,

Albeit against my conscience and my soul.


Cousin of Buckingham, and sage grave men,

Since you will buckle Fortune on my back,

To bear her burden, whe’er  will or no,

must have patience to endure the load.

But if black scandal or foul-faced reproach

Attend the sequel of your imposition,

Your mere enforcement shall acquittance me

From all the impure blots and stains thereof,

For God doth know, and you may partly see,

How far  am from the desire of this.


God bless your Grace! We see it, and will say it.


In saying so, you shall but say the truth.


Then  salute you with this royal title:

Long live King Richard, England’s worthy King!


Amen.


Tomorrow may it please you to be crowned?


Even when you please, for you will have it so.


Tomorrow, then, we will attend your Grace;

And so most joyfully we take our leave.


Come, let us to our holy work again.

Farewell, my cousin, farewell, gentle friends.



. London. Before the Towe

one door; Anne Duchess of Gloucester with Clarence’s young Daughter at

another door.


Who meets us here? My niece Plantagenet

Led in the hand of her kind aunt of Gloucester?

Now, for my life, she’s wandering to the Tower,

On pure heart’s love, to greet the tender Prince.

Daughter, well met.


God give your Graces both

happy and a joyful time of day.


As much to you, good sister. Whither away?


No farther than the Tower, and, as  guess,

Upon the like devotion as yourselves,

To gratulate the gentle Princes there.


Kind sister, thanks; we’ll enter all together.


And in good time, here the Lieutenant comes.

Master Lieutenant, pray you, by your leave,

How doth the Prince and my young son of York?


Right well, dear madam. By your patience,

may not suffer you to visit them.

The King hath strictly charged the contrary.


The King? Who’s that?


mean the Lord Protector.


The Lord protect him from that kingly title!

Hath he set bounds between their love and me?

am their mother; who shall bar me from them?


am their father’s mother.  will see them.


Their aunt  am in law, in love their mother.

Then bring me to their sights. ’ll bear thy blame,

And take thy office from thee, on my peril.


No, madam, no.  may not leave it so.

am bound by oath, and therefore pardon me.




Let me but meet you, ladies, one hour hence,

And ’ll salute your Grace of York as mothe
And reverend looker-on of two fair queens.

Come, madam, you must straight to Westminster,

There to be crowned Richard’s royal queen.


Ah, cut my lace asunde
That my pent heart may have some scope to beat,

Or else  swoon with this dead-killing news!


Despiteful tidings!  unpleasing news!


Be of good cheer, mother. How fares your Grace?


Dorset, speak not to me; get thee gone.

Death and destruction dog thee at thy heels;

Thy mother’s name is ominous to children.

If thou wilt outstrip death, go, cross the seas,

And live with Richmond, from the reach of hell.

Go, hie thee, hie thee from this slaughter-house,

Lest thou increase the number of the dead,

And make me die the thrall of Margaret’s curse,

Nor mother, wife, nor England’s counted Queen.


Full of wise care is this your counsel, madam.

Take all the swift advantage of the hours;

You shall have letters from me to my son

In your behalf, to meet you on the way.

Be not ta’en tardy by unwise delay.


ill-dispersing wind of misery!

my accursed womb, the bed of death!

cockatrice hast thou hatched to the world,

Whose unavoided eye is murderous.


Come, madam, come.  in all haste was sent.


And  with all unwillingness will go.

, would to God that the inclusive verge

Of golden metal that must round my brow

Were red-hot steel, to sear me to the brains.

Anointed let me be with deadly venom,

And die ere men can say “God save the Queen.”


Go, go, poor soul;  envy not thy glory.

To feed my humour, wish thyself no harm.


No? Why? When he that is my husband now

Came to me as  followed Henry’s corse,

When scarce the blood was well washed from his hands

Which issued from my other angel husband,

And that dear saint which then  weeping followed;

, when,  say,  looked on Richard’s face,

This was my wish: “Be thou,” quoth , “accursed

For making me, so young, so old a widow;

And when thou wedd’st, let sorrow haunt thy bed;

And be thy wife, if any be so mad,

More miserable by the life of thee

Than thou hast made me by my dear lord’s death.”

Lo, ere  can repeat this curse again,

Within so small a time, my woman’s heart

Grossly grew captive to his honey words,

And proved the subject of mine own soul’s curse,

Which hitherto hath held my eyes from rest;

For never yet one hour in his bed

Did  enjoy the golden dew of sleep,

But with his timorous dreams was still awaked.

Besides, he hates me for my father Warwick,

And will, no doubt, shortly be rid of me.


Poor heart, adieu;  pity thy complaining.


No more than with my soul  mourn for yours.


Farewell, thou woeful welcomer of glory.


Adieu, poor soul, that tak’st thy leave of it.


Go thou to Richmond, and good fortune guide thee.

Go thou to Richard, and good angels tend thee.

Go thou to sanctuary, and good thoughts possess

thee.

to my grave, where peace and rest lie with me.

Eighty odd years of sorrow have  seen,

And each hour’s joy wracked with a week of teen.


Stay, yet look back with me unto the Tower.

Pity, you ancient stones, those tender babes

Whom envy hath immured within your walls—

Rough cradle for such little pretty one,

Rude ragged nurse, old sullen playfellow

For tender princes, use my babies well.

So foolish sorrows bids your stones farewell.


London.  Room of State in the Palace


Catesby, Ratcliffe, Lovell, a Page and others.


Stand all apart. Cousin of Buckingham!


My gracious sovereign!


Give me thy hand.


Thus high, by thy advice

And thy assistance is King Richard seated.

But shall we wear these glories for a day,

Or shall they last, and we rejoice in them?


Still live they, and for ever let them last!


Ah, Buckingham, now do  play the touch,

To try if thou be current gold indeed.

Young Edward lives; think now what  would speak.


Say on, my loving lord.


Why, Buckingham,  say  would be King.


Why, so you are, my thrice-renowned lord.


Ha! Am  King? ’Tis so—but Edward lives.


True, noble Prince.


bitter consequence,

That Edward still should live “true noble prince!”

Cousin, thou wast not wont to be so dull.

Shall  be plain?  wish the bastards dead,

And  would have it suddenly performed.

What sayst thou now? Speak suddenly, be brief.


Your Grace may do your pleasure.


Tut, tut, thou art all ice; thy kindness freezes.

Say, have  thy consent that they shall die?


Give me some little breath, some pause, dear lord,

Before  positively speak in this.

will resolve you herein presently.



The King is angry. See, he gnaws his lip.


will converse with iron-witted fools

And unrespective boys; none are for me

That look into me with considerate eyes.

High-reaching Buckingham grows circumspect.

Boy!


My lord?


Know’st thou not any whom corrupting gold

Will tempt unto a close exploit of death?


know a discontented gentleman

Whose humble means match not his haughty spirit.

Gold were as good as twenty orators,

And will, no doubt, tempt him to anything.


What is his name?


His name, my lord, is Tyrrel.


partly know the man. Go, call him hither, boy.


The deep-revolving witty Buckingham

No more shall be the neighbour to my counsels.

Hath he so long held out with me, untired,

And stops he now for breath? Well, be it so.


How now, Lord Stanley, what’s the news?


Know, my loving lord,

The Marquess Dorset, as  hear, is fled

To Richmond, in the parts where he abides.


Come hither, Catesby. Rumour it abroad

That Anne my wife is very grievous sick;

will take order for her keeping close.

Inquire me out some mean poor gentleman,

Whom  will marry straight to Clarence’ daughter.

The boy is foolish, and  fear not him.

Look how thou dream’st!  say again, give out

That Anne, my Queen, is sick and like to die.

About it, for it stands me much upon

To stop all hopes whose growth may damage me.


must be married to my brother’s daughter,

Or else my kingdom stands on brittle glass.

Murder her brothers, and then marry her—

Uncertain way of gain! But  am in

So far in blood that sin will pluck on sin.

Tear-falling pity dwells not in this eye.


Is thy name Tyrrel?


James Tyrrel, and your most obedient subject.


Art thou indeed?


Prove me, my gracious lord.


Dar’st thou resolve to kill a friend of mine?


Please you. But  had rather kill two enemies.


Why then thou hast it; two deep enemies,

Foes to my rest, and my sweet sleep’s disturbers,

Are they that  would have thee deal upon.

Tyrell,  mean those bastards in the Tower.


Let me have open means to come to them,

And soon ’ll rid you from the fear of them.


Thou sing’st sweet music. Hark, come hither, Tyrrel.

Go, by this token. Rise, and lend thine ear.

There is no more but so. Say it is done,

And  will love thee, and prefer thee for it.


will dispatch it straight.




My lord,  have considered in my mind

The late request that you did sound me in.


Well, let that rest. Dorset is fled to Richmond.


hear the news, my lord.


Stanley, he is your wife’s son. Well, look unto it.


My lord,  claim the gift, my due by promise,

For which your honour and your faith is pawned:

Th’ earldom of Hereford, and the movables

Which you have promised  shall possess.


Stanley, look to your wife. If she convey

Letters to Richmond, you shall answer it.


What says your Highness to my just request?


do remember me, Henry the Sixth

Did prophesy that Richmond should be King,

When Richmond was a little peevish boy.

king perhaps—


My lord—


How chance the prophet could not at that time

Have told me,  being by, that  should kill him?


My lord, your promise for the earldom—


Richmond! When last  was at Exeter,

The Mayor in courtesy showed me the castle

And called it Rougemount, at which name  started,

Because a bard of Ireland told me once

should not live long after  saw Richmond.


My lord—


Ay, what’s o’clock?


am thus bold to put your Grace in mind

Of what you promised me.


Well, but what’s o’clock?


Upon the stroke of ten.


Well, let it strike.


Why let it strike?


Because that, like a jack, thou keep’st the stroke

Betwixt thy begging and my meditation.

am not in the giving vein today.


Why then, resolve me whether you will or no.


Thou troublest me;  am not in the vein.



And is it thus? Repays he my deep service

With such contempt? Made  him King for this?

, let me think on Hastings, and be gone

To Brecknock while my fearful head is on!


London. Another Room in the Palace



The tyrannous and bloody act is done,

The most arch deed of piteous massacre

That ever yet this land was guilty of.

Dighton and Forrest, who  did suborn

To do this piece of ruthless butchery,

Albeit they were fleshed villains, bloody dogs,

Melted with tenderness and mild compassion,

Wept like two children in their deaths’ sad story.

“, thus,” quoth Dighton, “lay the gentle babes;”

“Thus, thus,” quoth Forrest, “girdling one anothe
Within their alabaster innocent arms.

Their lips were four red roses on a stalk,

And in their summer beauty kissed each other.

book of prayers on their pillow lay,

Which once,” quoth Forrest, “almost changed my mind.

But, , the devil—” There the villain stopped;

When Dighton thus told on: “We smothered

The most replenished sweet work of nature

That from the prime creation e’er she framed.”

Hence both are gone with conscience and remorse

They could not speak; and so  left them both

To bear this tidings to the bloody King.


And here he comes. All health, my sovereign lord.


Kind Tyrrel, am  happy in thy news?


If to have done the thing you gave in charge

Beget your happiness, be happy then,

For it is done.


But didst thou see them dead?


did, my lord.


And buried, gentle Tyrrel?


The chaplain of the Tower hath buried them,

But where, to say the truth,  do not know.


Come to me, Tyrrel, soon, at after-supper,

When thou shalt tell the process of their death.

Meantime, but think how  may do thee good,

And be inheritor of thy desire.

Farewell till then.


humbly take my leave.



The son of Clarence have  pent up close;

His daughter meanly have  matched in marriage;

The sons of Edward sleep in Abraham’s bosom,

And Anne my wife hath bid the world good night.

Now, for  know the Breton Richmond aims

At young Elizabeth, my brother’s daughter,

And by that knot looks proudly on the crown,

To her go , a jolly thriving wooer.



My lord!


Good or bad news, that thou com’st in so bluntly?


Bad news, my lord. Morton is fled to Richmond,

And Buckingham, backed with the hardy Welshmen,

Is in the field, and still his power increaseth.


Ely with Richmond troubles me more nea
Than Buckingham and his rash-levied strength.

Come,  have learned that fearful commenting

Is leaden servitor to dull delay;

Delay leads impotent and snail-paced beggary;

Then fiery expedition be my wing,

Jove’s Mercury, and herald for a king!

Go, muster men. My counsel is my shield.

We must be brief when traitors brave the field.


London. Before the Palace



So now prosperity begins to mellow,

And drop into the rotten mouth of death.

Here in these confines slily have  lurked

To watch the waning of mine enemies.

dire induction am  witness to,

And will to France, hoping the consequence

Will prove as bitter, black, and tragical.

Withdraw thee, wretched Margaret. Who comes here?




Ah, my poor Princes! Ah, my tender babes,

My unblown flowers, new-appearing sweets!

If yet your gentle souls fly in the ai
And be not fixed in doom perpetual,

Hover about me with your airy wings

And hear your mother’s lamentation.


Hover about her; say that right for right

Hath dimmed your infant morn to aged night.


So many miseries have crazed my voice

That my woe-wearied tongue is still and mute.

Edward Plantagenet, why art thou dead?


Plantagenet doth quit Plantagenet;

Edward for Edward pays a dying debt.


Wilt thou,  God, fly from such gentle lambs,

And throw them in the entrails of the wolf?

When didst Thou sleep when such a deed was done?


When holy Harry died, and my sweet son.


Dead life, blind sight, poor mortal living ghost,

Woe’s scene, world’s shame, grave’s due by life usurped,

Brief abstract and record of tedious days,

Rest thy unrest on England’s lawful earth,

Unlawfully made drunk with innocent blood.


Ah, that thou wouldst as soon afford a grave

As thou canst yield a melancholy seat,

Then would  hide my bones, not rest them here.

Ah, who hath any cause to mourn but we?



If ancient sorrow be most reverend,

Give mine the benefit of seigniory,

And let my griefs frown on the upper hand.

If sorrow can admit society,


Tell o’er your woes again by viewing mine.

had an Edward, till a Richard killed him;

had a husband, till a Richard killed him.

Thou hadst an Edward, till a Richard killed him;

Thou hadst a Richard, till a Richard killed him.


had a Richard too, and thou didst kill him;

had a Rutland too; thou holp’st to kill him.


Thou hadst a Clarence too, and Richard killed him.

From forth the kennel of thy womb hath crept

hell-hound that doth hunt us all to death:

That dog, that had his teeth before his eyes,

To worry lambs and lap their gentle blood;

That excellent grand tyrant of the earth,

That reigns in galled eyes of weeping souls;

That foul defacer of God’s handiwork

Thy womb let loose to chase us to our graves.

upright, just, and true-disposing God,

How do  thank thee that this carnal cu
Preys on the issue of his mother’s body,

And makes her pew-fellow with others’ moan!


Harry’s wife, triumph not in my woes!

God witness with me,  have wept for thine.


Bear with me.  am hungry for revenge,

And now  cloy me with beholding it.

Thy Edward he is dead, that killed my Edward;

The other Edward dead, to quit my Edward;

Young York, he is but boot, because both they

Matched not the high perfection of my loss.

Thy Clarence he is dead that stabbed my Edward;

And the beholders of this frantic play,

Th’ adulterate Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Grey,

Untimely smothered in their dusky graves.

Richard yet lives, hell’s black intelligencer,

Only reserved their factor to buy souls

And send them thither. But at hand, at hand

Ensues his piteous and unpitied end.

Earth gapes, hell burns, fiends roar, saints pray,

To have him suddenly conveyed from hence.

Cancel his bond of life, dear God,  pray,

That  may live to say “The dog is dead.”


, thou didst prophesy the time would come

That  should wish for thee to help me curse

That bottled spider, that foul bunch-backed toad!


called thee then, vain flourish of my fortune;

called thee then, poor shadow, painted queen,

The presentation of but what  was,

The flattering index of a direful pageant;

One heaved a-high to be hurled down below,

mother only mocked with two fair babes;

dream of what thou wast; a garish flag,

To be the aim of every dangerous shot;

sign of dignity, a breath, a bubble;

queen in jest, only to fill the scene.

Where is thy husband now? Where be thy brothers?

Where are thy two sons? Wherein dost thou joy?

Who sues, and kneels, and says, “God save the Queen?”

Where be the bending peers that flattered thee?

Where be the thronging troops that followed thee?

Decline all this, and see what now thou art:

For happy wife, a most distressed widow;

For joyful mother, one that wails the name;

For one being sued to, one that humbly sues;

For Queen, a very caitiff crowned with care;

For she that scorned at me, now scorned of me;

For she being feared of all, now fearing one;

For she commanding all, obeyed of none.

Thus hath the course of justice wheeled about

And left thee but a very prey to time,

Having no more but thought of what thou wast

To torture thee the more, being what thou art.

Thou didst usurp my place, and dost thou not

Usurp the just proportion of my sorrow?

Now thy proud neck bears half my burdened yoke,

From which even here  slip my weary head,

And leave the burden of it all on thee.

Farewell, York’s wife, and Queen of sad mischance.

These English woes shall make me smile in France.


thou well skilled in curses, stay awhile,

And teach me how to curse mine enemies.


Forbear to sleep the night, and fast the days;

Compare dead happiness with living woe;

Think that thy babes were sweeter than they were,

And he that slew them fouler than he is.

Bettering thy loss makes the bad-causer worse.

Revolving this will teach thee how to curse.


My words are dull. , quicken them with thine!


Thy woes will make them sharp and pierce like mine.



Why should calamity be full of words?


Windy attorneys to their clients’ woes,

Airy succeeders of intestate joys,

Poor breathing orators of miseries,

Let them have scope, though what they do impart

Help nothing else, yet do they ease the heart.


If so, then be not tongue-tied. Go with me,

And in the breath of bitter words let’s smothe
My damned son, that thy two sweet sons smothered.


The trumpet sounds. Be copious in exclaims.



Who intercepts me in my expedition?


, she that might have intercepted thee,

By strangling thee in her accursed womb,

From all the slaughters, wretch, that thou hast done.


Hid’st thou that forehead with a golden crown

Where should be branded, if that right were right,

The slaughter of the Prince that owed that crown,

And the dire death of my poor sons and brothers?

Tell me, thou villain-slave, where are my children?


Thou toad, thou toad, where is thy brother Clarence,

And little Ned Plantagenet his son?


Where is the gentle Rivers, Vaughan, Grey?


Where is kind Hastings?


flourish, trumpets! Strike alarum, drums!

Let not the heavens hear these tell-tale women

Rail on the Lord’s anointed. Strike,  say!


Either be patient and entreat me fair,

Or with the clamorous report of wa
Thus will  drown your exclamations.


Art thou my son?


Ay,  thank God, my father, and yourself.


Then patiently hear my impatience.


Madam,  have a touch of your condition,

That cannot brook the accent of reproof.


, let me speak!


Do then, but ’ll not hear.


will be mild and gentle in my words.


And brief, good mother, for  am in haste.


Art thou so hasty?  have stayed for thee,

God knows, in torment and in agony.


And came  not at last to comfort you?


No, by the Holy Rood, thou know’st it well

Thou cam’st on earth to make the earth my hell.

grievous burden was thy birth to me;

Tetchy and wayward was thy infancy;

Thy school-days frightful, desp’rate, wild, and furious;

Thy prime of manhood daring, bold, and venturous;

Thy age confirmed, proud, subtle, sly, and bloody,

More mild, but yet more harmful, kind in hatred.

What comfortable hour canst thou name

That ever graced me with thy company?


Faith, none but Humphrey Hower, that called your Grace

To breakfast once, forth of my company.

If  be so disgracious in your eye,

Let me march on and not offend you, madam.

Strike up the drum.


prithee, hear me speak.


You speak too bitterly.


Hear me a word,

For  shall never speak to thee again.


So.


Either thou wilt die by God’s just ordinance

Ere from this war thou turn a conqueror,

Or  with grief and extreme age shall perish

And never more behold thy face again.

Therefore take with thee my most grievous curse,

Which in the day of battle tire thee more

Than all the complete armour that thou wear’st.

My prayers on the adverse party fight;

And there the little souls of Edward’s children

Whisper the spirits of thine enemies

And promise them success and victory.

Bloody thou art; bloody will be thy end.

Shame serves thy life and doth thy death attend.



Though far more cause, yet much less spirit to curse

Abides in me,  say amen to her.


Stay, madam,  must talk a word with you.


have no more sons of the royal blood

For thee to slaughter. For my daughters, Richard,

They shall be praying nuns, not weeping queens,

And therefore level not to hit their lives.


You have a daughter called Elizabeth,

Virtuous and fair, royal and gracious.


And must she die for this? , let her live,

And ’ll corrupt her manners, stain her beauty,

Slander myself as false to Edward’s bed,

Throw over her the veil of infamy.

So she may live unscarred of bleeding slaughter,

will confess she was not Edward’s daughter.


Wrong not her birth; she is a royal princess.


To save her life ’ll say she is not so.


Her life is safest only in her birth.


And only in that safety died her brothers.


Lo, at their births good stars were opposite.


No, to their lives ill friends were contrary.


All unavoided is the doom of destiny.


True, when avoided grace makes destiny.

My babes were destined to a fairer death,

If grace had blessed thee with a fairer life.


You speak as if that  had slain my cousins.


Cousins, indeed, and by their uncle cozened

Of comfort, kingdom, kindred, freedom, life.

Whose hand soever lanced their tender hearts,

Thy head, all indirectly, gave direction.

No doubt the murd’rous knife was dull and blunt

Till it was whetted on thy stone-hard heart,

To revel in the entrails of my lambs.

But that still use of grief makes wild grief tame,

My tongue should to thy ears not name my boys

Till that my nails were anchored in thine eyes,

And , in such a desp’rate bay of death,

Like a poor bark of sails and tackling reft,

Rush all to pieces on thy rocky bosom.


Madam, so thrive  in my enterprise

And dangerous success of bloody wars,

As  intend more good to you and yours

Than ever you or yours by me were harmed!


What good is covered with the face of heaven,

To be discovered, that can do me good?


Th’ advancement of your children, gentle lady.


Up to some scaffold, there to lose their heads.


Unto the dignity and height of fortune,

The high imperial type of this earth’s glory.


Flatter my sorrows with report of it.

Tell me what state, what dignity, what honour,

Canst thou demise to any child of mine?


Even all  have—ay, and myself and all

Will  withal endow a child of thine;

So in the Lethe of thy angry soul

Thou drown the sad remembrance of those wrongs

Which thou supposest  have done to thee.


Be brief, lest that the process of thy kindness

Last longer telling than thy kindness’ date.


Then know, that from my soul  love thy daughter.


My daughter’s mother thinks it with her soul.


What do you think?


That thou dost love my daughter from thy soul.

So from thy soul’s love didst thou love her brothers,

And from my heart’s love  do thank thee for it.


Be not so hasty to confound my meaning.

mean that with my soul  love thy daughter,

And do intend to make her Queen of England.


Well, then, who dost thou mean shall be her king?


Even he that makes her Queen. Who else should be?


What, thou?


Even so. How think you of it?


How canst thou woo her?


That would  learn of you,

As one being best acquainted with her humour.


And wilt thou learn of me?


Madam, with all my heart.


Send to her, by the man that slew her brothers,

pair of bleeding hearts; thereon engrave

“Edward” and “York.” Then haply will she weep.

Therefore present to her—as sometimes Margaret

Did to thy father, steeped in Rutland’s blood—

handkerchief, which, say to her, did drain

The purple sap from her sweet brothers’ body,

And bid her wipe her weeping eyes withal.

If this inducement move her not to love,

Send her a letter of thy noble deeds;

Tell her thou mad’st away her uncle Clarence,

Her uncle Rivers, ay, and for her sake

Mad’st quick conveyance with her good aunt Anne.


You mock me, madam; this is not the way

To win your daughter.


There is no other way,

Unless thou couldst put on some other shape,

And not be Richard, that hath done all this.


Say that  did all this for love of her?


Nay, then indeed she cannot choose but hate thee,

Having bought love with such a bloody spoil.


Look what is done cannot be now amended.

Men shall deal unadvisedly sometimes,

Which after-hours gives leisure to repent.

If  did take the kingdom from your sons,

To make amends ’ll give it to your daughter.

If  have killed the issue of your womb,

To quicken your increase  will beget

Mine issue of your blood upon your daughter.

grandam’s name is little less in love

Than is the doting title of a mother;

They are as children but one step below,

Even of your mettle, of your very blood;

Of all one pain, save for a night of groans

Endured of her, for whom you bid like sorrow.

Your children were vexation to your youth,

But mine shall be a comfort to your age.

The loss you have is but a son being King,

And by that loss your daughter is made Queen.

cannot make you what amends  would;

Therefore accept such kindness as  can.

Dorset your son, that with a fearful soul

Leads discontented steps in foreign soil,

This fair alliance quickly shall call home

To high promotions and great dignity.

The King, that calls your beauteous daughter wife,

Familiarly shall call thy Dorset brother;

Again shall you be mother to a king,

And all the ruins of distressful times

Repaired with double riches of content.

What, we have many goodly days to see.

The liquid drops of tears that you have shed

Shall come again, transformed to orient pearl,

Advantaging their loan with interest

Of ten times double gain of happiness.

Go then, my mother, to thy daughter go.

Make bold her bashful years with your experience;

Prepare her ears to hear a wooer’s tale;

Put in her tender heart th’ aspiring flame

Of golden sovereignty; acquaint the Princess

With the sweet silent hours of marriage joys,

And when this arm of mine hath chastised

The petty rebel, dull-brained Buckingham,

Bound with triumphant garlands will  come

And lead thy daughter to a conqueror’s bed;

To whom  will retail my conquest won,

And she shall be sole victoress, Caesar’s Caesar.


What were  best to say? Her father’s brothe
Would be her lord? Or shall  say her uncle?

Or he that slew her brothers and her uncles?

Under what title shall  woo for thee,

That God, the law, my honour, and her love

Can make seem pleasing to her tender years?


Infer fair England’s peace by this alliance.


Which she shall purchase with still-lasting war.


Tell her the King, that may command, entreats.


That at her hands, which the King’s King forbids.


Say she shall be a high and mighty queen.


To vail the title, as her mother doth.


Say  will love her everlastingly.


But how long shall that title “ever” last?


Sweetly in force unto her fair life’s end.


But how long fairly shall her sweet life last?


As long as heaven and nature lengthens it.


As long as hell and Richard likes of it.


Say , her sovereign, am her subject low.


But she, your subject, loathes such sovereignty.


Be eloquent in my behalf to her.


An honest tale speeds best being plainly told.


Then plainly to her tell my loving tale.


Plain and not honest is too harsh a style.


Your reasons are too shallow and too quick.


no, my reasons are too deep and dead—

Too deep and dead, poor infants, in their graves.


Harp not on that string, madam; that is past.


Harp on it still shall  till heart-strings break.


Now, by my George, my Garter, and my crown—


Profaned, dishonoured, and the third usurped.


swear—


By nothing, for this is no oath.

Thy George, profaned, hath lost his lordly honour;

Thy Garter, blemished, pawned his knightly virtue;

Thy crown, usurped, disgraced his kingly glory.

If something thou wouldst swear to be believed,

Swear then by something that thou hast not wronged.


Now, by the world—


’Tis full of thy foul wrongs.


My father’s death—


Thy life hath that dishonoured.


Then, by myself—


Thyself is self-misused.


Why, then, by God—


God’s wrong is most of all.

If thou didst fear to break an oath with Him,

The unity the King my husband made

Thou hadst not broken, nor my brothers died.

If thou hadst feared to break an oath by Him,

Th’ imperial metal circling now thy head

Had graced the tender temples of my child,

And both the Princes had been breathing here,

Which now, two tender bedfellows for dust,

Thy broken faith hath made a prey for worms.

What canst thou swear by now?


The time to come.


That thou hast wronged in the time o’erpast;

For  myself have many tears to wash

Hereafter time, for time past wronged by thee.

The children live whose fathers thou hast slaughtered,

Ungoverned youth, to wail it in their age;

The parents live whose children thou hast butchered,

Old barren plants, to wail it with their age.

Swear not by time to come, for that thou hast

Misused ere used, by times ill-used o’erpast.


As  intend to prosper and repent,

So thrive  in my dangerous affairs

Of hostile arms! Myself myself confound!

Heaven and fortune bar me happy hours!

Day, yield me not thy light, nor, night, thy rest!

Be opposite all planets of good luck

To my proceeding if with dear heart’s love,

Immaculate devotion, holy thoughts,

tender not thy beauteous princely daughter.

In her consists my happiness and thine;

Without her follows to myself and thee,

Herself, the land, and many a Christian soul,

Death, desolation, ruin, and decay.

It cannot be avoided but by this;

It will not be avoided but by this.

Therefore, dear mother— must call you so—

Be the attorney of my love to her;

Plead what  will be, not what  have been;

Not my deserts, but what  will deserve.

Urge the necessity and state of times,

And be not peevish found in great designs.


Shall  be tempted of the devil thus?


Ay, if the devil tempt you to do good.


Shall  forget myself to be myself?


Ay, if your self’s remembrance wrong yourself.


Yet thou didst kill my children.


But in your daughter’s womb  bury them,

Where, in that nest of spicery, they will breed

Selves of themselves, to your recomforture.


Shall  go win my daughter to thy will?


And be a happy mother by the deed.


go. Write to me very shortly,

And you shall understand from me her mind.


Bear her my true love’s kiss; and so, farewell.


Relenting fool, and shallow, changing woman!


How now, what news?


Most mighty sovereign, on the western coast

Rideth a puissant navy; to our shores

Throng many doubtful hollow-hearted friends,

Unarmed, and unresolved to beat them back.

’Tis thought that Richmond is their admiral;

And there they hull, expecting but the aid

Of Buckingham to welcome them ashore.


Some light-foot friend post to the Duke of Norfolk.

Ratcliffe, thyself, or Catesby. Where is he?


Here, my good lord.


Catesby, fly to the Duke.


will my lord, with all convenient haste.


Ratcliffe, come hither. Post to Salisbury.

When thou com’st thither—

Dull, unmindful villain,

Why stay’st thou here, and go’st not to the Duke?


First, mighty liege, tell me your Highness’ pleasure,

What from your Grace  shall deliver to him.


, true, good Catesby. Bid him levy straight

The greatest strength and power that he can make,

And meet me suddenly at Salisbury.


go.



What, may it please you, shall  do at Salisbury?


Why, what wouldst thou do there before  go?


Your Highness told me  should post before.


My mind is changed.


Stanley, what news with you?


None good, my liege, to please you with the hearing;

Nor none so bad but well may be reported.


Hoyday, a riddle! Neither good nor bad.

What need’st thou run so many miles about

When thou mayst tell thy tale the nearest way?

Once more, what news?


Richmond is on the seas.


There let him sink, and be the seas on him!

White-livered runagate, what doth he there?


know not, mighty sovereign, but by guess.


Well, as you guess?


Stirred up by Dorset, Buckingham, and Morton,

He makes for England, here to claim the crown.


Is the chair empty? Is the sword unswayed?

Is the King dead? The empire unpossessed?

What heir of York is there alive but we?

And who is England’s King but great York’s heir?

Then tell me, what makes he upon the seas?


Unless for that, my liege,  cannot guess.


Unless for that he comes to be your liege,

You cannot guess wherefore the Welshman comes.

Thou wilt revolt and fly to him,  fear.


No, my good lord; therefore mistrust me not.


Where is thy power, then, to beat him back?

Where be thy tenants and thy followers?

Are they not now upon the western shore,

Safe-conducting the rebels from their ships?


No, my good lord, my friends are in the north.


Cold friends to me. What do they in the north,

When they should serve their sovereign in the west?


They have not been commanded, mighty King.

Pleaseth your Majesty to give me leave,

’ll muster up my friends, and meet your Grace

Where and what time your Majesty shall please.


Ay, ay, thou wouldst be gone to join with Richmond.

But ’ll not trust thee.


Most mighty sovereign,

You have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful.

never was nor never will be false.


Go then, and muster men, but leave behind

Your son George Stanley. Look your heart be firm,

Or else his head’s assurance is but frail.


So deal with him as  prove true to you.




My gracious sovereign, now in Devonshire,

As  by friends am well advertised,

Sir Edward Courtney, and the haughty prelate,

Bishop of Exeter, his elder brother,

With many more confederates, are in arms.



In Kent, my liege, the Guilfords are in arms,

And every hour more competitors

Flock to the rebels, and their power grows strong.



My lord, the army of great Buckingham—


Out on you, owls! Nothing but songs of death?


There, take thou that till thou bring better news.


The news  have to tell your Majesty

Is, that by sudden floods and fall of waters,

Buckingham’s army is dispersed and scattered,

And he himself wandered away alone,

No man knows whither.


cry thee mercy.

There is my purse to cure that blow of thine.

Hath any well-advised friend proclaimed

Reward to him that brings the traitor in?


Such proclamation hath been made, my lord.



Sir Thomas Lovell and Lord Marquess Dorset,

’Tis said, my liege, in Yorkshire are in arms.

But this good comfort bring  to your Highness:

The Breton navy is dispersed by tempest.

Richmond, in Dorsetshire, sent out a boat

Unto the shore, to ask those on the banks

If they were his assistants, yea or no?—

Who answered him they came from Buckingham

Upon his party. He, mistrusting them,

Hoised sail, and made his course again for Brittany.


March on, march on, since we are up in arms,

If not to fight with foreign enemies,

Yet to beat down these rebels here at home.



My liege, the Duke of Buckingham is taken.

That is the best news. That the Earl of Richmond

Is with a mighty power landed at Milford

Is colder tidings, yet they must be told.


Away towards Salisbury! While we reason here

royal battle might be won and lost.

Someone take order Buckingham be brought

To Salisbury; the rest march on with me.


.  Room in Lord Stanley’s house



Sir Christopher, tell Richmond this from me:

That in the sty of the most deadly boa
My son George Stanley is franked up in hold;

If  revolt, off goes young George’s head;

The fear of that holds off my present aid.

So get thee gone. Commend me to thy lord;

Withal say that the Queen hath heartily consented

He should espouse Elizabeth her daughter.

But tell me, where is princely Richmond now?


At Pembroke, or at Ha’rfordwest in Wales.


What men of name resort to him?


Sir Walter Herbert, a renowned soldier;

Sir Gilbert Talbot, Sir William Stanley,

Oxford, redoubted Pembroke, Sir James Blunt,

And Rice ap Thomas, with a valiant crew,

And many other of great name and worth;

And towards London do they bend their power,

If by the way they be not fought withal.


Well, hie thee to thy lord;  kiss his hand.

My letter will resolve him of my mind.

Farewell.



. Salisbury. An open place



Will not King Richard let me speak with him?


No, my good lord; therefore be patient.


Hastings, and Edward’s children, Grey, and Rivers,

Holy King Henry, and thy fair son Edward,

Vaughan, and all that have miscarried

By underhand, corrupted foul injustice,

If that your moody discontented souls

Do through the clouds behold this present hour,

Even for revenge mock my destruction.

This is All-Souls’ day, fellow, is it not?


It is.


Why, then All-Souls’ day is my body’s doomsday.

This is the day which, in King Edward’s time,

wished might fall on me when  was found

False to his children and his wife’s allies.

This is the day wherein  wished to fall

By the false faith of him whom most  trusted.

This, this All-Souls’ day to my fearful soul

Is the determined respite of my wrongs.

That high All-Seer which  dallied with

Hath turned my feigned prayer on my head

And given in earnest what  begged in jest.

Thus doth He force the swords of wicked men

To turn their own points in their masters’ bosoms.

Thus Margaret’s curse falls heavy on my neck:

“When he,” quoth she, “shall split thy heart with sorrow,

Remember Margaret was a prophetess.”

Come lead me, officers, to the block of shame;

Wrong hath but wrong, and blame the due of blame.


Plain near Tamworth


colours.


Fellows in arms, and my most loving friends,

Bruised underneath the yoke of tyranny,

Thus far into the bowels of the land

Have we marched on without impediment;

And here receive we from our father Stanley

Lines of fair comfort and encouragement.

The wretched, bloody, and usurping boar,

That spoiled your summer fields and fruitful vines,

Swills your warm blood like wash, and makes his trough

In your embowelled bosoms—this foul swine

Is now even in the centre of this isle,

Near to the town of Leicester, as we learn.

From Tamworth thither is but one day’s march.

In God’s name, cheerly on, courageous friends,

To reap the harvest of perpetual peace

By this one bloody trial of sharp war.


Every man’s conscience is a thousand men,

To fight against that guilty homicide.


doubt not but his friends will turn to us.


He hath no friends but what are friends for fear,

Which in his dearest need will fly from him.


All for our vantage. Then in God’s name, march.

True hope is swift, and flies with swallow’s wings;

Kings it makes gods, and meaner creatures kings.


Bosworth Field


Surrey with others.


Here pitch our tent, even here in Bosworth field.

My Lord of Surrey, why look you so sad?


My heart is ten times lighter than my looks.


My lord of Norfolk.


Here, most gracious liege.


Norfolk, we must have knocks, ha, must we not?


We must both give and take, my loving lord.


Up with my tent! Here will  lie tonight.

But where tomorrow? Well, all’s one for that.

Who hath descried the number of the traitors?


Six or seven thousand is their utmost power.


Why, our battalia trebles that account.

Besides, the King’s name is a tower of strength

Which they upon the adverse faction want.

Up with the tent! Come, noble gentlemen,

Let us survey the vantage of the ground.

Call for some men of sound direction;

Let’s lack no discipline, make no delay,

For, lords, tomorrow is a busy day.



who pitch Richmond’s tent.


The weary sun hath made a golden set,

And by the bright track of his fiery ca
Gives token of a goodly day tomorrow.

Sir William Brandon, you shall bear my standard.

Give me some ink and paper in my tent;

’ll draw the form and model of our battle,

Limit each leader to his several charge,

And part in just proportion our small power.

My Lord of Oxford, you, Sir William Brandon,

And you, Sir Walter Herbert, stay with me.

The Earl of Pembroke keeps his regiment.—

Good Captain Blunt, bear my goodnight to him,

And by the second hour in the morning

Desire the Earl to see me in my tent.

Yet one thing more, good captain, do for me.

Where is Lord Stanley quartered, do you know?


Unless  have mista’en his colours much,

Which well  am assured  have not done,

His regiment lies half a mile at least

South from the mighty power of the King.


If without peril it be possible,

Sweet Blunt, make some good means to speak with him,

And give him from me this most needful note.


Upon my life, my lord, ’ll undertake it;

And so God give you quiet rest tonight.


Good night, good Captain Blunt.


Come, gentlemen,

Let us consult upon tomorrow’s business;

Into my tent. The dew is raw and cold.

[_Richmond, Brandon Herbert, and  Oxford withdraw into the tent. The

others exeunt._]


Soldiers.


What is’t o’clock?


It’s supper time, my lord. It’s nine o’clock.


will not sup tonight. Give me some ink and paper.

What, is my beaver easier than it was?

And all my armour laid into my tent?


It is, my liege, and all things are in readiness.


Good Norfolk, hie thee to thy charge;

Use careful watch; choose trusty sentinels.


go, my lord.


Stir with the lark tomorrow, gentle Norfolk.


warrant you, my lord.



Catesby!


My lord?


Send out a pursuivant-at-arms

To Stanley’s regiment. Bid him bring his powe
Before sunrising, lest his son George fall

Into the blind cave of eternal night.


Fill me a bowl of wine. Give me a watch.

Saddle white Surrey for the field tomorrow.

Look that my staves be sound, and not too heavy.

Ratcliffe!


My lord?


Saw’st thou the melancholy Lord Northumberland?


Thomas the Earl of Surrey and himself,

Much about cockshut time, from troop to troop

Went through the army, cheering up the soldiers.


So,  am satisfied. Give me a bowl of wine.

have not that alacrity of spirit

Nor cheer of mind that  was wont to have.

Set it down. Is ink and paper ready?


It is, my lord.


Bid my guard watch; leave me.

Ratcliffe, about the mid of night come to my tent

And help to arm me. Leave me,  say.

[_Exit Ratcliffe. Richard withdraws into his tent; attendant soldiers

guard it_.]



Fortune and victory sit on thy helm!


All comfort that the dark night can afford

Be to thy person, noble father-in-law.

Tell me, how fares our loving mother?


, by attorney, bless thee from thy mother,

Who prays continually for Richmond’s good.

So much for that. The silent hours steal on,

And flaky darkness breaks within the east.

In brief, for so the season bids us be,

Prepare thy battle early in the morning,

And put thy fortune to the arbitrement

Of bloody strokes and mortal-staring war.

, as  may—that which  would  cannot—

With best advantage will deceive the time,

And aid thee in this doubtful shock of arms.

But on thy side  may not be too forward,

Lest, being seen, thy brother, tender George,

Be executed in his father’s sight.

Farewell; the leisure and the fearful time

Cuts off the ceremonious vows of love

And ample interchange of sweet discourse,

Which so-long-sundered friends should dwell upon.

God give us leisure for these rites of love!

Once more, adieu. Be valiant, and speed well.


Good lords, conduct him to his regiment.

’ll strive with troubled thoughts to take a nap,

Lest leaden slumber peise me down tomorrow

When  should mount with wings of victory.

Once more, good night, kind lords and gentlemen.


Thou, whose captain  account myself,

Look on my forces with a gracious eye;

Put in their hands Thy bruising irons of wrath,

That they may crush down with a heavy fall

Th’ usurping helmets of our adversaries;

Make us Thy ministers of chastisement,

That we may praise Thee in the victory.

To Thee  do commend my watchful soul

Ere  let fall the windows of mine eyes.

Sleeping and waking, , defend me still!




Let me sit heavy on thy soul tomorrow.

Think how thou stabbed’st me in my prime of youth

At Tewksbury; despair therefore, and die!

Be cheerful, Richmond, for the wronged souls

Of butchered princes fight in thy behalf.

King Henry’s issue, Richmond, comforts thee.




When  was mortal, my anointed body

By thee was punched full of deadly holes.

Think on the Tower and me. Despair, and die;

Harry the Sixth bids thee despair and die.

Virtuous and holy, be thou conqueror.

Harry, that prophesied thou shouldst be King,

Doth comfort thee in thy sleep. Live, and flourish!




Let me sit heavy in thy soul tomorrow,

, that was washed to death with fulsome wine,

Poor Clarence, by thy guile betrayed to death.

Tomorrow in the battle think on me,

And fall thy edgeless sword. Despair, and die!

Thou offspring of the house of Lancaster,

The wronged heirs of York do pray for thee.

Good angels guard thy battle; live, and flourish.




Let me sit heavy in thy soul tomorrow,

Rivers that died at Pomfret. Despair and die!


Think upon Grey, and let thy soul despair!


Think upon Vaughan, and with guilty fea
Let fall thy lance. Despair and die!


Awake, and think our wrongs in Richard’s bosom

Will conquer him. Awake, and win the day.




Bloody and guilty, guiltily awake,

And in a bloody battle end thy days.

Think on Lord Hastings. Despair and die!

Quiet untroubled soul, awake, awake.

Arm, fight, and conquer for fair England’s sake.




Dream on thy cousins smothered in the Tower.

Let us be lead within thy bosom, Richard,

And weigh thee down to ruin, shame, and death;

Thy nephews’ souls bid thee despair and die.

Sleep, Richmond, sleep in peace, and wake in joy;

Good angels guard thee from the boar’s annoy.

Live, and beget a happy race of kings;

Edward’s unhappy sons do bid thee flourish.




Richard, thy wife, that wretched Anne thy wife,

That never slept a quiet hour with thee,

Now fills thy sleep with perturbations.

Tomorrow in the battle think on me,

And fall thy edgeless sword. Despair and die!

Thou quiet soul, sleep thou a quiet sleep;

Dream of success and happy victory.

Thy adversary’s wife doth pray for thee.




The first was  that helped thee to the crown;

The last was  that felt thy tyranny.

, in the battle think on Buckingham,

And die in terror of thy guiltiness.

Dream on, dream on of bloody deeds and death.

Fainting, despair; despairing, yield thy breath.

died for hope ere  could lend thee aid,

But cheer thy heart, and be thou not dismayed.

God and good angels fight on Richmond’s side;

And Richard fall in height of all his pride.




Give me another horse! Bind up my wounds!

Have mercy, Jesu!—Soft!  did but dream.

coward conscience, how dost thou afflict me!

The lights burn blue; it is now dead midnight.

Cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh.

What do  fear? Myself? There’s none else by.

Richard loves Richard, that is,  am .

Is there a murderer here? No. Yes,  am.

Then fly. What, from myself? Great reason why,

Lest  revenge. What, myself upon myself?

Alack,  love myself. Wherefore? For any good

That  myself have done unto myself?

, no, alas,  rather hate myself

For hateful deeds committed by myself.

am a villain. Yet  lie,  am not.

Fool, of thyself speak well. Fool, do not flatter.

My conscience hath a thousand several tongues,

And every tongue brings in a several tale,

And every tale condemns me for a villain.

Perjury, perjury, in the highest degree;

Murder, stern murder, in the direst degree;

All several sins, all used in each degree,

Throng to the bar, crying all “Guilty, guilty!”

shall despair. There is no creature loves me,

And if  die no soul will pity me.

And wherefore should they, since that  myself

Find in myself no pity to myself?

Methought the souls of all that  had murdered

Came to my tent, and everyone did threat

Tomorrow’s vengeance on the head of Richard.



My lord!


Zounds! Who’s there?


Ratcliffe, my lord; ’tis . The early village cock

Hath twice done salutation to the morn;

Your friends are up and buckle on their armour.


Ratcliffe,  have dreamed a fearful dream!

What think’st thou, will our friends prove all true?


No doubt, my lord.


Ratcliffe,  fear,  fear!


Nay, good my lord, be not afraid of shadows.


By the apostle Paul, shadows tonight

Have struck more terror to the soul of Richard

Than can the substance of ten thousand soldiers

Armed in proof and led by shallow Richmond.

’Tis not yet near day. Come, go with me.

Under our tents ’ll play the eavesdropper,

To see if any mean to shrink from me.




Good morrow, Richmond.


Cry mercy, lords and watchful gentlemen,

That you have ta’en a tardy sluggard here.


How have you slept, my lord?


The sweetest sleep and fairest-boding dreams

That ever entered in a drowsy head

Have  since your departure had, my lords.

Methought their souls whose bodies Richard murdered

Came to my tent and cried on victory.

promise you, my heart is very jocund

In the remembrance of so fair a dream.

How far into the morning is it, lords?


Upon the stroke of four.


Why, then ’tis time to arm and give direction.

His oration to his soldiers.

More than  have said, loving countrymen,

The leisure and enforcement of the time

Forbids to dwell upon. Yet remember this:

God, and our good cause, fight upon our side;

The prayers of holy saints and wronged souls,

Like high-reared bulwarks, stand before our faces.

Richard except, those whom we fight against

Had rather have us win than him they follow.

For what is he they follow? Truly, gentlemen,

bloody tyrant and a homicide;

One raised in blood, and one in blood established;

One that made means to come by what he hath,

And slaughtered those that were the means to help him;

base foul stone, made precious by the foil

Of England’s chair, where he is falsely set;

One that hath ever been God’s enemy.

Then, if you fight against God’s enemy,

God will, in justice, ward you as his soldiers;

If you do sweat to put a tyrant down,

You sleep in peace, the tyrant being slain;

If you do fight against your country’s foes,

Your country’s fat shall pay your pains the hire;

If you do fight in safeguard of your wives,

Your wives shall welcome home the conquerors;

If you do free your children from the sword,

Your children’s children quits it in your age.

Then, in the name of God and all these rights,

Advance your standards, draw your willing swords.

For me, the ransom of my bold attempt

Shall be this cold corpse on the earth’s cold face;

But if  thrive, the gain of my attempt

The least of you shall share his part thereof.

Sound drums and trumpets boldly and cheerfully!

God, and Saint George! Richmond and victory!




What said Northumberland as touching Richmond?


That he was never trained up in arms.


He said the truth. And what said Surrey then?


He smiled, and said, “The better for our purpose.”


He was in the right, and so indeed it is.


Tell the clock there. Give me a calendar.

Who saw the sun today?


Not , my lord.


Then he disdains to shine, for by the book

He should have braved the east an hour ago.

black day will it be to somebody.

Ratcliffe!


My lord?


The sun will not be seen today!

The sky doth frown and lour upon our army.

would these dewy tears were from the ground.

Not shine today? Why, what is that to me

More than to Richmond? For the selfsame heaven

That frowns on me looks sadly upon him.



Arm, arm, my lord. The foe vaunts in the field.


Come, bustle, bustle! Caparison my horse.

Call up Lord Stanley; bid him bring his power.

will lead forth my soldiers to the plain,

And thus my battle shall be ordered:

My foreward shall be drawn out all in length,

Consisting equally of horse and foot;

Our archers shall be placed in the midst.

John Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Earl of Surrey,

Shall have the leading of this foot and horse.

They thus directed, we will follow

In the main battle, whose puissance on either side

Shall be well winged with our chiefest horse.

This, and Saint George to boot! What think’st thou, Norfolk?


good direction, warlike sovereign.


This found  on my tent this morning.


“Jockey of Norfolk, be not too bold.

For Dickon thy master is bought and sold.”

thing devised by the enemy.

Go, gentlemen, every man unto his charge.

Let not our babbling dreams affright our souls;

Conscience is but a word that cowards use,

Devised at first to keep the strong in awe.

Our strong arms be our conscience, swords our law.

March on. Join bravely. Let us to it pell-mell,

If not to heaven, then hand in hand to hell.

His oration to his army.

What shall  say more than  have inferred?

Remember whom you are to cope withal,

sort of vagabonds, rascals, and runaways,

scum of Bretons and base lackey peasants,

Whom their o’er-cloyed country vomits forth

To desperate adventures and assured destruction.

You sleeping safe, they bring to you unrest;

You having lands, and blessed with beauteous wives,

They would restrain the one, distain the other.

And who doth lead them but a paltry fellow,

Long kept in Brittany at our mother’s cost?

milksop, one that never in his life

Felt so much cold as over-shoes in snow?

Let’s whip these stragglers o’er the seas again,

Lash hence these overweening rags of France,

These famished beggars, weary of their lives,

Who, but for dreaming on this fond exploit,

For want of means, poor rats, had hanged themselves.

If we be conquered, let men conquer us,

And not these bastard Bretons, whom our fathers

Have in their own land beaten, bobbed, and thumped,

And in record left them the heirs of shame.

Shall these enjoy our lands? Lie with our wives,

Ravish our daughters?


Hark,  hear their drum.

Fight, gentlemen of England! Fight, bold yeomen!

Draw, archers, draw your arrows to the head!

Spur your proud horses hard, and ride in blood!

Amaze the welkin with your broken staves!


What says Lord Stanley? Will he bring his power?


My lord, he doth deny to come.


Off with his son George’s head!


My lord, the enemy is past the marsh.

After the battle let George Stanley die.


thousand hearts are great within my bosom.

Advance our standards! Set upon our foes!

Our ancient word of courage, fair Saint George,

Inspire us with the spleen of fiery dragons!

Upon them! Victory sits on our helms.


Another part of the Field



Rescue, my lord of Norfolk, rescue, rescue!

The King enacts more wonders than a man,

Daring an opposite to every danger.

His horse is slain, and all on foot he fights,

Seeking for Richmond in the throat of death.

Rescue, fair lord, or else the day is lost!




horse!  horse! My kingdom for a horse!


Withdraw, my lord; ’ll help you to a horse.


Slave,  have set my life upon a cast,

And  will stand the hazard of the die.

think there be six Richmonds in the field;

Five have  slain today instead of him.

horse!  horse! My kingdom for a horse!


. Another part of the Field


Then retreat being sounded. Richmond exits, and Richard’s body is


the crown, with other Lords and Soldiers.


God and your arms be praised, victorious friends!

The day is ours, the bloody dog is dead.


Courageous Richmond, well hast thou acquit thee!

Lo, here, this long-usurped royalty

From the dead temples of this bloody wretch

Have  plucked off, to grace thy brows withal.

Wear it, enjoy it, and make much of it.


Great God of heaven, say Amen to all!

But tell me, is young George Stanley living?


He is, my lord, and safe in Leicester town,

Whither, if it please you, we may now withdraw us.


What men of name are slain on either side?


John, Duke of Norfolk, Walter, Lord Ferrers,

Sir Robert Brakenbury, and Sir William Brandon.


Inter their bodies as becomes their births.

Proclaim a pardon to the soldiers fled

That in submission will return to us.

And then, as we have ta’en the sacrament,

We will unite the white rose and the red.

Smile heaven upon this fair conjunction,

That long have frowned upon their enmity.

What traitor hears me and says not Amen?

England hath long been mad, and scarred herself:

The brother blindly shed the brother’s blood;

The father rashly slaughtered his own son;

The son, compelled, been butcher to the sire.

All this divided York and Lancaster,

Divided in their dire division.

, now let Richmond and Elizabeth,

The true succeeders of each royal house,

By God’s fair ordinance conjoin together,

And let their heirs, God, if Thy will be so,

Enrich the time to come with smoothed-faced peace,

With smiling plenty, and fair prosperous days.

Abate the edge of traitors, gracious Lord,

That would reduce these bloody days again,

And make poor England weep in streams of blood.

Let them not live to taste this land’s increase,

That would with treason wound this fair land’s peace.

Now civil wounds are stopped, peace lives again.

That she may long live here, God say Amen.


***          ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will

be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by .. copyright

law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,

so the Foundation  can copy and distribute it in the

United States without permission and without paying copyright

royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part

of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project

Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the  ™

concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,

and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following

the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use

of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything fo
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very

easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation

of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project

Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may

do practically  in the United States with eBooks not protected

by .. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark

license, especially commercial redistribution.

:  



To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free

distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work

(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project

Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full

Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at

www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section . General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project

Gutenberg™ electronic works

.. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™

electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to

and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property

agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all

the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return o
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in you
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a

Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound

by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the

person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph

...

.. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be

used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who

agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few

things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See

paragraph . below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project

Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this

agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™

electronic works. See paragraph . below.

.. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the

Foundation” or ), owns a compilation copyright in the collection

of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual

works in the collection are in the public domain in the United

States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the

United States and you are located in the United States, we do not

claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,

displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as

all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope

that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting

free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™

works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the

Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily

comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the

same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when

you share it without charge with others.

.. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern

what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are

in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,

check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this

agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,

distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any

other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no

representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any

country other than the United States.

.. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

... The following sentence, with active links to, or othe
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appea
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work

on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the

phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,

performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and

most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no

restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it

under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this

eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the

United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where

you are located before using this eBook.

... If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is

derived from texts not protected by .. copyright law (does not

contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the

copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in

the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are

redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project

Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply

either with the requirements of paragraphs .. through .. o
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™

trademark as set forth in paragraphs .. or ...

... If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted

with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution

must comply with both paragraphs .. through .. and any

additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms

will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works

posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the

beginning of this work.

... Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™

License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this

work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

... Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this

electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without

prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph .. with

active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project

Gutenberg™ License.

... You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,

compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including

any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access

to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format

other than “Plain Vanilla ” or other format used in the official

version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website

, you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense

to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means

of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain

Vanilla ” or other form. Any alternate format must include the

full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph ...

... Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,

performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works

unless you comply with paragraph .. or ...

... You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing

access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from

the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method

you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed

to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has

agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project

Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid

within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are

legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty

payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project

Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in

Section , “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg

Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies

you in writing  within 30 days of receipt that s/he

does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™

License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all

copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue

all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™

works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph .., a full refund of

any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the

electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of

receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free

distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

... If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project

Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than

are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing

from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of

the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set

forth in Section  below.

..

... Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable

effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread

works not protected by .. copyright law in creating the Project

Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™

electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may

contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate

or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or othe
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk o
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage o
cannot be read by your equipment.

...  ,    - Except for the “Right

of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph .., the Project

Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project

Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project

Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all

liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal

fees.         , 

,         

...     , 

,         

, , , ,  



...       - If you discover a

defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can

receive a refund of the money  you paid for it by sending a

written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you

received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium

with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you

with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in

lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person

or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second

opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If

the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing

without further opportunities to fix the problem.

... Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth

in paragraph .., this work is provided to you “-”,  

,   ,   


... Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied

warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of

damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement

violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the

agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer o
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity o
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the

remaining provisions.

...  - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the

trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone

providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in

accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the

production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™

electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,

including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of

the following which you do or cause to occur:  distribution of this

or any Project Gutenberg™ work,  alteration, modification, o
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and  any

Defect you cause.

Section . Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of

electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of

computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It

exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations

from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the

assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s

goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will

remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project

Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure

and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future

generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary

Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see

Sections  and  and the Foundation information page at

www.gutenberg.org

Section . Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary

Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit

501() educational corporation organized under the laws of the

state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal

Revenue Service. The Foundation's  or federal tax identification

number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary

Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by

.. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,

Salt Lake City,  84116,  596-1887. Email contact links and up

to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website

and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section . Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg

Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without

widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of

increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be

freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest

array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations

are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt

status with the 

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating

charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United

States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a

considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up

with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations

where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To 

or determine the status of compliance for any particula
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we

have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition

against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who

approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make

any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from

outside the United States. .. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation

methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of othe
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To

donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section . General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael . Hart was the originator of the Project

Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be

freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and

distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of

volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed

editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in

the .. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not

necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular pape
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main  search

facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,

including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary

Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to

subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
