The tragicall Historie of Doctor Faustus. 

Enter Chorus. 

NOt marching now in fields of Thracimene, 
Where Mars did mate the Carthaginians, 
Nor sporting in the dallianceof loue, 
In courts of Kings where state isouerturnd, 
Nor in the pompeof prowd audacious deedes, 
Intends our Muse to daunt his heauenly verse: 
Onely this (Gentlemen) we must performe, 
The forme of Faustus fortunes good or bad. 
To patient Iudgements we appealeour plaude, 
And speake for Faustus in his infancie: 
Now is he borne, his parents base ofstocke, 
In Germany, within a towne calld Rhodes: 
Of riper yéeres to Wertenberg he went, 
Whereas his kinsmen chiefly brought himvp, 
So soone hée profites in Diuinitie, 
The fruitfull plot ofScholerismegrac’t, 
That shortly he was grac’t with Doctors name, 
Excelling all, whose swéete delight disputes 
In heauenly matters of Theologie, 
Till swolne with cunning of a selfe conceit, 
His waxen wings did mountaboue his reach, 
And melting heauens conspirde his ouerthrow. 
For falling to a diuelish exercise, 
And glutted more with learnings golden gifts,  
He surffets vpon cursed Negromancy, 
Nothing so sweete as magicke is to him 
Which he preferres before his chiefest blisse, 
And this the man that in his study sits. 

Exit

Enter Faustus in his Study. 

Faustus Settlethy studies Faustus, and beginne 
To sound the deapth of that thou wilt professe: 
Hauing commencde, bea Diuine in shew, 
Yet leuell at the end of euery Art, 
And liue and die in Aristotles workes: 
Sweete Anulatikes tis thou hast rauisht me, 
Bene disserere est finis logicis, 
Is, to dispute well, Logickes chiefestend 
Affoords this Artno greater myracle: 
Then reade no more, thou hast attaind theend: 
A greater subiect fitteth Faustus wit, 
Bid Oncaymæon farewell, Galen come: 
Séeing, vbi desinit philosophus, ibi incipit medicus. 
Be a physition Faustus, heapevp golde, 
And beeternizde for some wondrouscure, 
Summum bonum medicinæ sanitas, 
The end of physicke is our bodieshealth: 
Why Faustus, hast thou not attaind that end? 
Is not thy common talkesound Aphorismes? 
Are not thy billes hung vp as monuments, 
whereby whole Citties haue escapt the plague, 
And thousand desprate maladies béene easde, 
Yet artthou still but Faustus, and a man. 
wouldst thou make man to liue eternally? 
Or being dead, raisethem to life againe? 
Then this profession were to be estéemd. 
Physicke farewell, where is Iustinian? 
Si vna e[·]dem[que] res legatus duobus, 
Alter rem alter valorem rei, &c. 
A pretty case of paltry legacies: 
Ex hæredtari filium n[*]n potest pater nisi: 
Such is the subiect of the institute 
And vniuersall body of the Church: 
His study fittes a mercenarydrudge, 
who aimes at nothing but externall trash, T
he deuill and illiberall for me: 
when allis done, Diuinitie is best. 
Ieromes Bible, Faustus, view it well. 
Stipendium peccati mors est: ha, Stipendium, &c. 
The reward of sinne is death: thats hard. 
Si peccasse negamus, fallimur, & nulla est in nobis veritas. 
If we say that we haue no sinne, 
We deceiue our selues, and theres no truth in vs. 
Why then belike we must sinne, 
And so consequently die. 
I, we must die an euerlasting death:
What doctrinecall you this, Che sera, sera, 
What wil be, shall be? Diuinitie, adieu, 
These Metaphisickes of Magicians, 
And Negromantike bookes are heauenly 
Lines, circles, sceanes, letters and characters: 
Ay, these are those that Faustus most desires. 
O what a world of profit and delight, 
Of power, of honor, of omnipotence 
Is promisedto the studious Artizan? 
All things that moouebetweene the quiet poles 
Shalbe at my commaund. Emperours and Kings, 
Are but obeyd in their seuerall prouinces: 
Nor can they raise the winde, or rend the cloudes: 
But his dominionthat excéedes in this, 
Stretcheth as farre as doth the minde of man. 
A sound Magician is a mighty god: 
Héere Faustus trie thy braines to gaine a deitie. 

Enter Wagner. 

Wagner, commend me to my deerest friends, 
The Germaine Valdes, and Cornelius, 
Request them earnestly to visiteme.

I wil sir.

Their conferencewill be a greater help to me,  
exit. 

Thnall my labours, plodde I nere so fast. 

Enter the good Angell and the euill Angell. 

Faustus, lay that damned booke aside, 
And gaze not on it, lest it tempt thy soule, 
And heape Gods heauy wrath vpon thy head, 
Reade, readethe scriptures, that is blasphemy. 

Go forward Faustus in that famous art, 
Wherein allnatures treasury is containd: 
Be thou on earth as Ioue is in the skie, 
Lord and commaunderof these Elements. 
 
Exeunt

How am I glutted with conceit of this? 
Shall I make spirits fetch me what I please, 
Resolue me ofall ambiguities, 
Performe what desperate enterprise I will?
Ile haue them flye to India for gold, 
Ransacke the Ocean for orient pearle, 
And search all corners of the new found world 
For pleasant fruites and princely delicates: 
Ile haue them reade mée straunge philosophie, 
And tell the secrets of all forraine kings, 
Ile hauethem wall all Iermany with brasse, 
And make swift Rhine circle faire Wertenberge, 
Ile haue them fill the publike schooles with skill. 
Wherewith the students shalbe brauely clad: 
Ile leuy souldiers with the coyne theybring, 
And chase the Prince of Parma from our land, 
And raigne sole king of all our prouinces: 
Yea stranger engines for thebrunt of warre, 
Then was the fiery kéele at Antwarpes bridge, 
Ile make my seruile spirits to inuent: 
Come Germaine Valdes and Cornelius, 
And make me blest with your sage conference, 
Valdes, swéete Valdes, and Cornelius, 

Enter Valdes and Cornelius.
 
Know that your words haue woon me at the last, 
To practise Magicke and concealed arts: 
Yet not your words onely, but mineowne fantasie, 
That willreceiue no obiect for my head, 
But ruminates on Negremantiqueskill, 
Philosophy is odious and obscure, 
Both Law and Phisicke are for pettie wits, 
Diuinitie is basest of the thrée, 
Vnpleasant, harsh, contemptible and vilde, 
Tis Magicke, Magicke that hath rauisht mée, 
Then gentle friends ayde me in this attempt, 
And I that haue with Consissylogismes 
Graueld the Pastors of the Germaine Church, 
And made the flowring pride of Wertenberge 
Swarme to my Problemes as the infernall spirits 
On swéet Musæus when he came to hell, 
Will be as cunning as Agrippa was,
Whose shadowes made all Europe honor him. 

Faustus these bookes thy wit and our experience 
Shall make all nations to canonize vs, 
As Indian Moores obeytheir Spanish Lords,
So shall the subiects of euery element 
Be alwaies seruiceable to vs thrée, 
LikeLyons shall they guard vs when we please, 
Like Almaine Rutters with their horsemens staues, 
Or Lapland Gyants trotting by our sides, 
Sometimes like women, orvnwedded maides, 
Shadowing more beautie intheir ayrie browes, 
Then in their white breastsof thequeeneof Loue: 
For Venice shall they dregge huge Argoces, 
And from America the golden fléece, 
That yearely stuffes olde Philips treasury 
If learned Faustus will be resolute. 

Valdes as resolute am I in this 
As thou to liue, therefore obiectit not. 

The myracles that Magicke will performe, 
Will make thée vow to studie nothing else, 
He that is grounded in Astrologie, 

Inricht with tongues well séene minerals, 
Hath all the principles Magicke doth require, 
Then doubt not (Faustus) but to be renowmd, 
And more frequented for this mystery, 
Then heretofore the Dolphian Oracle. 
The spirits tell me they can drie the sea, 
And fetch the treasure of all forraine wrackes, 
I, all the wealth that our forefathers hid 
Within the massie entrailes of the earth. 
Then tell me Faustus, what shal we three want? 

Nothing Cornelius, O this cheares my soule, 
Come shewe me some demonstrations magicall, 
That I may coniure in some lustie groue, 
And haue these ioyes in full possession. 

Thenhaste thée to some solitary groue, 
And beare wise Bacons and Albanus workes, 
The Hebrew Psalter, and new Testament,
And whatsoeuer else is requisit 
Wee will enforme thée ere our conference cease. 

Valdes, first let him know the words of art, 
And then all other ceremonies learnd, 
Faustus may trie his cunning by himselfe. 

First Ile instruct thee inthe rudiments, 
And then wilt thou be perfecter then I. 

Then come and dyne with me, and after meate 
Wéele canuas euery quidditie thereof:
For ere I sleepe Ile trie what I can do, 
This night Ile coniure though I die therefore.

Exeunt.

Enter two Schollers. 

I wonder whats become of Faustus, that was 
wont to make our schooles ring with, sic probo. 

That shall we know, for see here comes his boy. 

Enter Wagner. 

How now sirra, wheres thy maister? 

God in heauen knowes. 
 
Why, dost not thou know? 

Yes I know, but that followes not. 

Go too sirra, leaue your ieasting, and tell vs where 
hée is. 

That follows not necessary by force of argument, 
that you being licentiateshould stand vpon’t, therefore ac= 
knowledge your error, and be attentiue. 

Why, didst thounot say thou knewst?

Haue you any witnesse on’t? 

Yes sirra, I heard you. 

Aske my fellow if I be a thiefe. 

Well, you will not tell vs. 

Yes sir, I will tell you, yet if you were not dunces you 
would neuer aske me such a question, for isnot he cor­
pus naturale, and is not that mobile, thenwherefore should 
you aske me such a question: but that I am by nature fleg= 
maticke, slowe to wrath, and proneto leachery, (to loue I 
would say) it were not for you to come within fortie foote of 
the place ofexecution, although I do not doubtto sée you 
both hang’d the next Sessions. Thus hauing triumpht ouer 
you, I will set my countnance like a precisian, and begin to 
speake thus: trulymy deare brethren, my maister is within 
at dinner with Valdes and Cornelius, asthis wine if it could 
speake, it would enforme your worships, and so the Lord 
blesse you, preserue you, and kéepe you my deare brethren, 
my deare brethren. 

exit. 

Nay then I feare he is falne into that damned art, for 
which they two are infamous through the world. 
 
Were he a stranger, and not alied to me, yet should 
I grieue for him: but come let vs go and informe the Rector, 
and sée if hée by his graue counsailecan reclaime him. 
 
O but I feare me nothing can reclaime him. 

Yet let vs trie whatwe can do. 

Exeunt.

Enter Faustus to coniure. 

Now that the gloomy shadow ofthe earth, 
Longing to view Orions drisling looke, 
Leapes from th’antartikeworld vnto the skie, 
And dimmes the welkin with her pitchy breath: 
Faustus, begin thine incantations, 
And trie if diuels will obey thy hest, 
Séeing thou hast prayde and sacrific’d to them. 
VVithin this circle is Iehouahs name, 
Forward and backward, and Agramithist, 
The breuiated names ofholy Saints, 
Figures of euery adiunct to the heauens, 
And characters of signes and erring starres. 
By which the spirits are inforst to rise, 
Then feare not Faustus, butbe resolute, 
And trie the vttermost Magicke can performe. 
Sint mihi dei acherontis propitij, valeat numen triplex Iehouæ, ignei, 
aerij, Aquatani spiritus saluete, Orientis princeps Belsibub, inferni 
ardentis monarcha & demigorgon, propitiamus vos, vt apariat & 
surgat Mephastophilis, quòd tumeraris, per Iehouam gehennam & 
consecratam aquam quam nunc spargo, signúmque crucis quodnunc 
facio, & per vota nostra ipse nunc surgat nobis dicatis Mephasto­
philis. 

Enter a Diuell. 

I charge thée to returne and chaunge thy shape, 
Thou art too vgly to attend on me, 
Goe and returne an old Franciscan Frier, 
That holy shape becomes a diuell best. 

Exit diuell. 

I see theres vertue in my heauenly words, 
Who would not be proficient in this art? 
How pliantis this Mephastophilis? 
Full of obedience and humilitie, 
Such is the force of Magicke and my spels, 
No Faustus, thou art Coniurer laureate 
That canst commaund great Mephastophilis, 
Quin regis Mephastophilis fratris imagine. 

Enter Mephostophilis. 

Now Faustus, what wouldst thou haue me do? 

I charge thée wait vpon me whilst I liue, 
To do what euer Faustus shall commaund, 
Be it to make the Moone drop from her spheare, 
Or the Ocean to ouerwhelme the world. 

I am a seruant to great Lucifer, 
And may not follow thée without his leaue, 
No more thenhe commaunds must we performe. 

Did not he charge thée to appeare to mée? 

No, I came now hither ofmine owne accord. 

Did not my coniuring spéeches raise thee? speake. 

That was the cause, but yet per accident, 
For when we heare one racke the name of God, 
Abiure the scriptures, and his Sauiour Christ, 
Wée flye, in hope to get his glorious soule, 
Nor will we come, vnlesse he vse such meanes 
Whereby he is in danger to be damnd: 
Therefore the shortest cut for coniuring 
Is stoutly to abiure the Trinitie, 
And pray deuoutly to the prince of hell. 

So Faustus hath already done, & holds this principle 
There is no chiefe but onely Belsibub, 
To whom Faustus doth dedicate himselfe, 
This word damnation terrifies not him, 
For he confounds hell in Elizium, 
His ghost be with the olde Philosophers, 
But leauing these vaine trifles of mens soules, 
Tell me what is that Lucifer thy Lord? 

Arch­regentand commaunder ofall spirits.

Was not that Lucifer an Angell once?

Yes Faustus, and most dearely lou’d of God. 

How comes it then that heis prince of diuels? 

O by aspiring pride and insolence, 
For which God threw him from the face of heauen. 

and what are you that liue with Lucifer? 

Vnhappy spirits that fell with Lucifer, 
Conspir’d against our God with Lucifer, 
And are for euer damnd with Lucifer. 

VVhere are you damn’d?  

In hell

How comes it then that thou art out of hel? 

Why this is hel, nor am I out of it: 
Thinkst thouthat I who saw the face of God, 
And tasted the eternal ioyes of heauen, 
Am not tormented with ten thousand hels, 
In being depriv’d of euerlasting blisse: 
O Faustus, leaue these friuolous demaunds, 
which strike a terror to my fainting soule. 

What, is great Mephastophilis so passionate, 
For being deprivd of the ioyes of heauen? 
Learne thou of Faustus manly fortitude, 
And scorne those ioyes thou neuer shalt possesse. 
Go beare those tidings to great Lucifer, 
Séeing Faustus hath incurrdeternall death, 
By desprate thoughtsagainst Ioues deitie: 
Say, he surrenders vp to him his soule, 
So he will spare him 24. yéeres, 
Letting him liue in al voluptuousnesse, 
Hauing thee euer to attend on me, 
To giue me whatsoeuer I shal aske, 
To tel me whatsoeuer I demaund, 
To slay mine enemies, and ayde my friends, 
And alwayes be obedient to my wil: 
Goe and returne to mighty Lucifer, 
And méete mée in my study atmidnight, 
And then resolue me of thy maisters minde. 

I will Faustus. 

exit.

Had I as many soules as there be starres, 
Ide giue them al for Mephastophilis: 
By him Ile be great Emprour of the world, 
And make a bridge through themoouing ayre, 
To passe the Ocean with a band of men, 
Ile ioyne the hils that binde the Affricke shore, 
And make that land continent to Spaine, 
And both contributory to my crowne: 
The Emprour shal not liue but by my leaue, 
Nor any Potentate of Germany:  
Now that I haue obtaind what I desire,  
Ile liue in speculation of this Art,  
Til Mephastophilis returne againe.  
  
exit. 

Enter Wagner and the Clowne. 
 
Sirra boy, come hither.  

How, boy? swowns boy, I hope you haue séene ma=  
ny boyes with such pickadevaunts as I haue. Boy quotha?  

Tel me sirra, hast thou any commings in?  

I, and goings out too, you may sée else.  

Alas poore slaue, sée how pouerty iesteth in his na=  
kednesse, the vilaine is bare, and out of seruice, and so hun=  
gry, that I know he would giue his soule to the Diuel for a  
shoulder of mutton, though it were blood rawe.  

How, my soule to the Diuel for a shoulder of mut=  
ton though twere blood rawe? not so good friend, burladie I  
had néede haue it wel roasted, and good sawce to it, if I pay so  
déere.  

wel, wilt thou serue me, and Ile make thée go like  
Qui mihi discipulus?  

How, in verse?  

No sirra, in beaten silke and staues acre .  

how, how, knaues acre? I, I thought that was al  
the land his father left him: Doe yee heare, I would be sorie  
to robbe you of your liuing.  

Sirra, I say in staues acre.  

Oho, oho, staues acre, why then belike, if I were  
your man, I should be ful of vermine.  

So thou shalt, whether thou beest with me, or no:  
but sirra, leaue your iesting, and binde your selfe presently  
vnto me for seauen yéeres, or Ile turne al the lice about thée  
into familiars, and they shal teare thée in péeces.  

Doe you heare sir? you may saue that labour, they  
are too familiar with me already, swowns they are as bolde  
with my flesh, as if they had payd for my meate and drinke.  

wel, do you heare sirra? holde, take these gilders.  

Gridyrons, what be they?  

Why french crownes. 

Mas but for the name of french crownes a man 
were as good haue as many english counters, and what 
should I do with these? 

VVhy now sirra thou art at an houres warning 
whensoeuer or wheresoeuer the diuell shall fetch thee. 

No, no, here take your gridirons againe. 

Truly Ilenone ofthem. 

Truly but you shall. 

Beare witnesse I gaue them him. 

Beare witnesse I giue them you againe. 

VVell, I will cause two diuels presently to fetch 
thée away Baliol and Belcher. 

Let your Balio and your Belcher comehere, and Ile 
knocke them, they were neuer so knocktsince they were di= 
uels, say I should kill one ofthem what would folkes say? do 
ye see yonder tall fellow in the round slop, hee has kild thedi= 
uell, so I should becald kill diuellall the parish ouer. 

Enter two diuells, and the clowne runnes vp 
and downe crying. 

Balioll and Belcher, spirits away.

Exeunt. 

what, are they gone? a vengeance on them, they 
haue vilde long nailes, there was a hee diuelland a shée di­
uell, Ile tell you how you shall know them, all hée diuels has 
hornes, and all shée diuels has clifts and clouen feete. 

Well sirra follow me. 

But do you hear? if I should serue you, would you 
teachme to raise vp Banios and Belcheos? 

I will teach thee to turne thy selfe to any thing, to 
a dogge, or a catte, or a mouse, or a ratte, orany thing. 

How? a Christian fellow to a dogge or a catte, a 
mouse or a ratte? no, no sir, if you turne me into any thing, 
let it be in the likenesseof a little pretie frisking flea, that I 
may be here and there and euery where, O Ile tickle the pre= 
tie wenches plackets Ile be amongst themifaith. 

Wel sirra, come. 

But doe you heare Wagner?

How Balioll and Belcher. 

O Lord I pray sir, let Banio and Belcher go sléepe. 

Vilaine, call me Maister Wagner, and letthy left 
eye be diametarily fixt vpon my right heele, with quasi vesti­
gias nostras infistere 

exit 

God forgiue me, he speakes Dutch fustian: well, 
Ile folow him, Ileserue him, thats flat. 

exit 

Enter Faustus in his Study. 

Now Faustus must thou néedes be damnd, 
And canst thou not be saued? 
what bootes it then to thinke of God or heauen? 
Away with such vaine fancies and despaire, 
Despaire in God, and trust in Belsabub: 
Now go not backeward: no Faustus, be resolute, 
why wauerest thou? O something soundeth in mine eares: 
Abiure this Magicke, turne to God againe, 
I and Faustus wil turneto God againe.
To God? he loues thee not, 
The god thou seruest is thine owne appetite, 
wherein is fixt the loue of Belsabub, 
To him Ile build an altare and a church, 
And offer luke warme blood of new borne babes.
 
Enter good Angell, and Euill. 

Swéet Faustus, leauethat execrable art. 

Contrition, prayer, repentance: what of them? 

O they are meanes to bring thée vntohea= 
uen. 

Rather illusions fruites of lunacy, 
That makes men foolish that do trust them most. 

Swéet Faustus thinke of heauen, and hea= 
uenly things. 

No Faustus, thinke of honor and wealth.

exeunt.

Of wealth, 
Why the signory of Emden shalbe mine, 
when Mephatophilus shal stand by me, 
What God can hurt thée Faustus? thou art safe, 
Cast no more doubts, come Mephastophilus, 
And bring gladtidings from great Lucifer: 
Ist not midnight? come Mephastophilus, 
Veni veni Mephastophile enter Meph: 
Now tel, what sayes Lucifer thy Lord? 

enter Meph 

That I shal waite on Faustus whilst I liue, 
So he wil buymy seruice with his soule. 

Already Faustus hath hazarded that for thée. 

But Faustus, thou must bequeathe it solemnely, 
And write a déede of gift with thine owne blood, 
For that security craues great Lucifer: 
If thou deny it, I wil backe to hel. 

Stay Mephastophilus, and tel me, what good wil 
my soule do thy Lord? 

Inlarge his kingdome. 

Is that the reason he tempts vs thus? 

Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris. 

Haue you any paine that tortures others? 

As great as haue thehumane soules of men: 
But tel me Faustus, shal I haue thy soule, 
And I wil be thy slaue, and waite on thée, 
And giue thée more than thou hast wit to aske. 

I Mephastophilus, I giue it thée. 

Then stabbe thine arme couragiously, 
And binde thy soule, that atsome certaine day 
Great Lucifer may claime it as his owne, 
And thenbe thou as great as Lucifer. 

Loe Mephastophilus, for loue of thée, 
I cut mine arme, and with my proper blood 
Assure my soule to begreat Lucifers, 
ChiefeLord and regent of perpetual night, 
View heere the blood that trickles from mine arme, 
And letit be propitious for my wish. 

But Faustus, thou must write it in manner of a 
déede of gift. 

I so I will, but Mephastophilis my bloud conieales 
and I can writeno more. 

Ile fetch thée fier todissolue it straight. 

Exit.

What might the staying of my bloud portend? 
Is it vnwilling I should write this bill? 
Why streames it not, that I maywrite afresh? 
Faustus giues tothee his soule: ah there it stayde, 
Why shouldstthou not? is not thy soule thine owne? 
Then write againe, Faustus giues to thée his soule. 

Enter Mephastophilis with a chafer of coles. 

Heres fier, comeFaustus, set it on. 

So now the bloud begins to cleare againe, 
Now will I make an endeimmediately. 

O what will not I do to obtaine his soule? 

Consummatum est, this Bill is ended, 
And Faustus hath bequeath’d his soule to Lucifer. 
But what is this inscription on mine arme? 
Homo fuge, whither should I flie? 
If vnto God hée’le throwe thée downe to hell, 
My sences aredeceiu’d, here’s nothing writ, 
I sée it plaine, here in this place is writ, 
Homo fuge, yet shall not Faustus flye. 

Ile fetch him somewhat to delight his minde.

Exit.
 
Enter with diuels, giuing crownes and rich apparell to 
Faustus, and daunce, and then depart. 

Speake Mephastophilis, what meanes this shewe? 

Nothing Faustus, but todelight thy minde withall, 
And to shewe thee what Magicke can performe.

But may I raise vp spirits when I please? 

I Faustus, and do greater things thenthese. 

Then theres inough for a thousand soules, 
Here Mephastophilis receiue this scrowle,
A déede of gift of body and ofsoule: 
But yet conditionally, that thou performe 
All articles prescrib’d betweenevs both. 

Faustus, I sweare by hel and Lucifer  
To effect all promises betweene vs made.  

Then heare me reade them: on these conditions fol=  
lowing.  
First, that Faustus may be a spirit in forme and substance.  
Secondly, that Mephastophilis shall be his seruant, and at  
his commaund.  
Thirdly, that Mephastophilis shall do for him, and bring  
him whatsoeuer.  
Fourthly, that hee shall be in his chamber or house in­ 
uisible.  
Lastly, that hee [*]hall appeare to the said Iohn Faustus at all  
times, in what forme or shape soeuer he please.  
I Iohn Faustus of Wertenberge, Doctor, by these presents, do  
giue both body and soule to Lucifer prince of the East, and his  
minister Mephastophilis, and furthermore graunt vnto them,  
that 24. yeares being expired, the articles aboue written in­ 
uiolate, full power to fetch or carry the said Iohn Faustus body  
and soule, flesh, bloud, or goods, into their habitation where­ 
soeuer.  

  By me Iohn Faustus. 
  
Speake Faustus, do you deliuer this as your déede?  

I, take it, and the diuell giue thee good ont.  

Now Faustus aske what thou wilt.  

First will I question with thée about hell,  
Tel me, where is the place that men call hell?  

Vnder the heauens.  

I, but where about?  

Within the bowels of these elements,  
Where we are tortur’d and remaine for euer,  
Hell hath no limits, nor is circumscrib’d  
In one selfe place, for where we are is hell,  
And where hell is, must we euer be:  
And to conclude, when all the world dissolues,  
And euery creature shalbe purified,  
All places shall be hell that is not heauen.  

Come, I thinke hell’s a fable.  

I, thinke so still, till experience change thy minde.  

Why? thinkst thou then that Faustus shall bée  
damn’d?  

I of necessitie, for here’s the scrowle,  
  Wherein thou hast giuen thy soule to Lucifer.  

I, and body too, but what of that?  
Thinkst thou that Faustus is so fond,  
To imagine, that after this life there is any paine?  
Tush these are trifles and méere olde wiues tales.  

But Faustus I am an instance to proue the contrary  
For I am damnd, and am now in hell.  

How? now in hell? nay and this be hell, Ile wil=  
lingly be damnd here: what walking, disputing, &c. But  
leauing off this, let me haue a wife, the fairest maid in Ger­ 
many, for I am wanton and lasciuious, and can not liue  
without a wife.  

How, a wife? I prithée Faustus talke not of a wife.  

Nay sweete Mephastophilis fetch me one, for I will  
haue one.  

VVell thou wilt haue one, sit there till I come, Ile  
fetch thée a wife in the diuels name.  

Enter with a diuell drest like a woman,  
with fier workes.  

Tel Faustus, how dost thou like thy wife?  

A plague on her for a hote whore.  

Tut Faustus, marriage is but a ceremoniall toy, if  
thou louest me, thinke more of it.  
Ile cull thée out the fairest curtezans,  
And bring them eu’ry morning to thy bed,  
She whome thine eie shall like, thy heart shal haue,  
Be she as chaste as was Penelope,  
As wise as Saba, or as beautiful  
As was bright Lucifer before his fall.  
Hold, take this booke, peruse it thorowly,  
The iterating of these lines brings golde,  
The framing of this circle on the ground,  
Brings whirlewindes, tempests, thunder and lightning.  
Pronounce this thrice deuoutly to thy selfe,  
And men in armour shal appeare to thee,  
Ready to execute what thou desirst.  

Thankes Mephastophilus, yet faine would I haue  
a booke wherein I might beholde al spels and incantations,  
that I might raise vp spirits when I please.  

Here they are in this booke. 

There turne to them  

Now would I haue a booke where I might sée al  
characters and planets of the heauens, that I might knowe  
their motions and dispositions.  

Héere they are too. 

Turne to them  

Nay let me haue one booke more, and then I haue  
done, wherein I might sée al plants, hearbes and trées that  
grow vpon the earth.  

Here they be.  

O thou art deceiued.  

Tut I warrant thée. 

Turne to them  

When I behold the heauens, then I repent,  
And curse thée wicked Mephastophilus,  
Because thou hast depriu’d me of those ioyes.  

why Faustus,  
Thinkst thou heauen is such a glorious thing?  
I tel thée tis not halfe so faire as thou,  
Or any man that breathes on earth.  

 How proouest thou that?  

It was made for man, therefore is man more excel=  
lent.  

 If it were made for man, twas made for me:  
I wil renounce this magicke, and repent.  

Enter good Angel, and euill Angel.  

Faustus, repent yet, God wil pitty thée.  

Thou art a spirite, God cannot pitty thée.  

who buzzeth in mine eares I am a spirite?  
Be I a diuel, yet God may pitty me,  
I God wil pitty me, if I repent.  
euill  
I but Faustus neuer shal repent.  exeunt  

My hearts so hardned I cannot repent,  
Scarse can I name saluation, faith, or heauen,  
But feareful ecchoes thunders in mine eares,  
Faustus, thou art damn’d, then swordes and kniues,  
Poyson, gunnes, halters, and invenomd stéele  
Are layde before me to dispatch my selfe,  
And long ere this I should haue slaine my selfe,  
Had not swéete pleasure conquerd déepe dispaire.  
Haue not I made blinde Homer sing to me,  
Of Alexanders loue, and Enons death,  
And hath not he that built the walles of Thebes,  
With rauishing sound of his melodious harp  
Made musicke with my Mephastophilis,  
Why should I dye then, or basely dispaire?  
I am resolu’d Faustus shal nere repent,  
Come Mephastophilis, let vs dispute againe,  
And argue of diuine Astrologie,  
Tel me, are there many heauens aboue the Moone?  
Are all celestiall bodies but one globe,  
As is the substance of this centricke earth?  

As are the elements, such are the spheares,  
Mutually folded in each others orbe,  
And Faustus all iointly moue vpon one axletrée,  
Whose terminine is tearmd the worlds wide pole,  
Nor are the names of Saturne, Mars, or Iupiter  

But tell me, haue they all one motion? both situ &  
tempore.  

All ioyntly moue from East to West in 24. houres  
vpon the poles of the world, but differ in their motion vpon  
the poles of the Zodiake.  

Tush, these slender trifles Wagner can decide,  
Hath Mephastophilis no greater skill?  
Who knowes not the double motion of the plannets?  
The first is finisht in a naturall day,  
The second thus, as Saturne in 30. yeares, Iupiter in 12.  
Mars in 4. the Sunne, Venus, and Mercury in a yeare: the  
Moone in 28. dayes. Tush these are fresh mens suppositions,  
but tell me, hath euery spheare a dominion or Intelligentij?  

I.  

How many heauens or spheares are there?  

Nine, the seuen planets, the firmament, and the im=  
periall heauen.  

VVell, resolue me in this question, why haue wée  
not coniunctions, oppositions, aspects, eclipsis, all at one  
time, but in some yeares we haue more, in some lesse?  

Per inæqualem motum respectu totius.  

Well, I am answered, tell me who made the world?  

I will not.  

Sweete Mephastophilus tell me.  

Moue me not, for I will not tell thée.  

Villaine, haue I not bound thée to tel me any thing?  

I, that is not against our kingdome, but this is,  
Thinke thou on hell Faustus, for thou art damnd.  

Thinke Faustus vpon God that made the world.  

Remember this. 

Exit.  

I, goe accursed spirit to vgly hell,  
Tis thou hast damnd distressed Faustus soule:  
Ist not too late?  

Enter good Angell and euill.  

Too late.  

Neuer too late, if Faustus can repent.  

If thou repent diuels shall teare thee in péeces.  

Repent, & they shal neuer race thy skin. Exeunt.  

Ah Christ my Sauiour, seeke to saue distressed Fau=  
stus soule.  

Enter Lucifer, Belsabub, and Mephastophilus.  

Christ cannot saue thy soule, for he is iust,  
Theres none but I haue intrest in the same.  

O who art thou that lookst so terrible?  

I am Lucifer, and this is my companion Prince in  
hel.  

O Faustus, they are come to fetch away thy soule.  

we come to tell thée thou dost iniure vs,  
Thou talkst of Christ, contrary to thy promise  
Thou shouldst not thinke of God, thinke of the deuil,  
And of his dame too.  

Nor will I henceforth: pardon me in this,  
And Faustus vowes neuer to looke to heauen,  
Neuer to name God, or to pray to him,  
To burne his Scriptures, slay his Ministers,  
And make my spirites pull his churches downe.  

Do so, and we will highly gratifie thee:  
Faustus, we are come from hel to shew thée some pastime:  
sit downe, and thou shalt see al the seauen deadly sinnes ap=  
peare in their proper shapes.  

That sight will be as pleasing vnto me, as paradise  
was to Adam, the first day of his creation.  

Talke not of paradise, nor creation, but marke this  
shew, talke of the diuel, and nothing else: come away.  

Enter the seauen deadly sinnes.  
Now Faustus, examine them of their seueral names and  
dispositions.  

What art thou? the first.  

I am Pride, I disdaine to haue any parents, I am  
like to Ouids flea, I can créepe into euery corner of a wench,  
sometimes like a periwig, I sit vpon her brow, or like a fan  
of feathers, I kisse her lippes, indéede I doe, what doe I not?  
but fie, what a scent is here? Ile not speake an other worde,  
except the ground were perfumde and couered with cloth of  
arras.  

What art thou? the second.  

I am Couetousnes, begotten of an olde churle, in  
an olde leatherne bag: and might I haue my wish, I would  
desire, that this house, and all the people in it were turnd to  
golde, that I might locke you vppe in my good chest, O my  
sweete golde  

What art thou? the third.  
Wrath I am Wrath, I had neither father nor mother, I  
leapt out of a lions mouth, when I was scarce half an houre  
olde, and euer since I haue runne vp and downe the worlde,  
with this case of rapiers wounding my selfe, when I had no  
body to fight withal: I was borne in hel, and looke to it, for  
some of you shalbe my father.  

what art thou? the fourth.  

I am Enuy, begotten of a Chimney­swéeper, and  
an Oyster wife, I cannot reade, and therefore wish al bookes  
were burnt: I am leane with séeing others eate, O that  
there would come a famine through all the worlde, that all  
might die, and I liue alone, then thou shouldst see how fatt I  
would be: but must thou sit and I stand? come downe with  
a vengeance.  

Away enuious rascall: what art thou? the fift.  

who I sir, I am Gluttony, my parents are al dead,  
and the diuel a peny they haue left me, but a bare pention,  
and that is 30. meales a day, and tenne beauers, a small  
triflle to suffice nature, O I come of a royall parentage, my  
grandfather was a gammon of bacon, my grandmother a  
hogs head of Claret­wine: My godfathers were these, Pe=  
ter Pickle­herring, and Martin Martlemas biefe, O but  
my godmother she was a iolly gentlewoman, and webelo=  
ued in euery good towne and Citie, her name was mistresse  
Margery March­béere: now Faustus, thou hast heard all my  
Progeny, wilt thou bid me to supper?  

No, Ile sée thée hanged, thou wilt eate vp all my  
victualls.  

Then the diuell choake thée.  

Choake thy selfe glutton: what art thou? the sixt.  

I am sloath, I was begotten on a sunny banke,  
where I haue laine euer since, and you haue done me great  
iniury to bring me from thence, let me be carried thither a=  
gaine by Gluttony and Leachery, Ile not speake an other  
word for a Kings raunsome.  

What are you mistresse minkes? the seauenth  
and last.  

Who I sir? I am one that loues an inch of raw  
Mutton better then an ell of fride stock­fish, and the first  
letter of my name beginnes with leachery.  
Away, to hel, to hel. 

exeunt the sinnes.  

Now Faustus, how dost thou like this?  

O this feedes my soule.  

But Faustus, in hel is al manner of delight.  

O might I sée hel, and returne againe, how happy  
were I then?  

Thou shalt, I wil send for thée at midnight, in mean  
time take this booke, peruse it throwly, and thou shalt turne  
thy selfe into what shape thou wilt.  

Great thankes mighty Lucifer, this wil I kéepe as  
chary as my life.  

Farewel Faustus, and thinke on the diuel.  

Farewel great Lucifer, come Mephastophilis.  

exeunt omnes.  

enter Wagner solus.  

Learned Faustus,  
To know the secrets of Astronomy,  
Grauen in the booke of Ioues hie firmament,  
Did mount himselfe to scale Olympus top,  
Being seated in a chariot burning bright,  
Drawne by the strength of yoky dragons neckes,  
He now is gone to prooue Cosmography,  
And as I guesse, wil first ariue at Rome,  
To see the Pope, and manner of his court,  
And take some part of holy Peters feast,  
That to this day is highly solemnizd. 

exit Wagner  

Enter Faustus and Mephastophilus.  

Hauing now, my good Mephastophilus,  
Past with delight the stately towne of Trier,  
Inuirond round with ayrie mountaine tops,  
With walles of flint, and déepe intrenched lakes,  
Not to be wonne by any conquering prince,  
From Paris next coasting the Realme of France,  
Wée sawe the riuer Maine fall into Rhine,  
VVhose bankes are set with groues of fruitful vines.  
Then vp to Naples, rich Campania,  
VVhose buildings faire and gorgeous to the eye,  
The stréetes straight forth, and pau’d with finest bricke,  
Quarters the towne in foure equiuolence.  
There sawe we learned Maroes golden tombe,  
The way he cut an English mile in length,  
Thorough a rocke of stone in one nights space.  
From thence to Venice, Padua and the rest,  
In midst of which a sumptuous Temple stands,  
That threats the starres with her aspiring toppe.  
Thus hitherto hath Faustus spent his time,  
But tell me now, what resting place is this?  
Hast thou as erst I did commaund,  
Conducted me within the walles of Rome?  

Faustus I haue, and because we wil not be vnpro=  
uided, I haue taken vp his holinesse priuy chamber for  
our vse.  

I hope his holinesse will bid vs welcome. (cheare,  

Tut, tis no matter man, wéele be bold with his good  
And now my Faustus, that thou maist perceiue  
What Rome containeth to delight thée with,  
Know that this Citie stands vpon seuen hilles  
That vnderprops the groundworke of the same,  
Ouer the which foure stately bridges leane,  
That makes safe passage to each part of Rome.  
Vpon the bridge call’d Ponto Angelo,  
Erected is a Castle passing strong,  
Within whose walles such store of ordonance are,  
And double Canons, fram’d of carued brasse,  
As match the dayes within one compleate yeare,  
Besides the gates and high piramides,  
Which Iulius Cæsar brought from Affrica.  

Now by the kingdomes of infernall rule,  
Of Styx, Acheron, and the fiery lake  
Of euer burning Phlegeton I sweare,  
That I do long to sée the monuments  
And scituation of bright splendant Rome,  
Come therefore lets away.  

Nay Faustus stay, I know youd faine sée the Pope,  
And take some part of holy Peters feast,  
Where thou shalt see a troupe of bald­pate Friers,  
Whose summum bonum is in belly­cheare.  

Well, I am content, to compasse then some sport,  
And by their folly make vs merriment,  
Then charme me that I may be inuisible, to do what I  
please vnseene of any whilst I stay in Rome.  

So Faustus, now do what thou wilt, thou shalt not  
be discerned.  

Sound a Sonnet, enter the Pope and the Cardinall of Lorraine  
to the banket, with Friers attending.  

My Lord of Lorraine, wilt please you draw neare.  

Fall too, and the diuel choake you and you spare.  

How now, whose that which spake? Friers looke  
about.  

Héere’s no body, if it like your Holynesse.  

My Lord, here is a daintie dish was sent me from  
the Bishop of Millaine.  

I thanke you sir. 

Snatch it.  

How now, whose that which snatcht the meate  
from me? will no man looke?  
My Lord, this dish was sent me from the Cardinall of Flo=  
rence.  

You say true, Ile hate.  

What againe? my Lord Ile drinke to your grace  

Ile pledge your grace.  

My Lord, it may be some ghost newly crept out of  
Purgatory come to begge a pardon of your holinesse.  

It may be so, Friers prepare a dirge to lay the fury  
of this ghost, once againe my Lord fall too.  

The Pope crosseth himselfe.  

What, are you crossing of your selfe?  
VVell vse that tricke no more, I would aduise you.  

Crosse againe.  

VVell, theres the second time, aware the third,  
I giue you faire warning.  
 
Crosse againe, and Faustus hits him a boxe of the eare, 
and they all runne away.

Come on Mephastophilis, what shall we do? 

Nay I know not, we shalbe curstwith bell, booke, 
and candle. 

How? bell, booke, and candle, candle, booke, and bell, 
Forward and backward, to curse Faustus to hell. 
Anon you shal heare a hogge grunt, a calfe bleate, and an asse 
braye,because it is S. Peters holy day. 

Enter all the Friers to sing the Dirge. 

Come brethren, lets about our businesse with good deuotion. 

Sing this. Cursed be hee that stole away his holinesse meate 
from the table. 
maledicat dominus. 
Cursed be hee that strooke his holinesse a blowe on the face. 
maledicat dominus. 
Cursed be he that tooke Frier Sandelo a blow on the pate.
male, &c. 
Cursed be he that disturbeth our holy Dirge. 
male, &c. 
Cursed be he that tooke away his holinesse wine. 
maledicat dominus. 
Et omnes sancti. Amen.
 
Beate the Friers, and fling fier­workes among 
them, and so Exeunt. 

Enter Chorus. 

VVhen Faustus had with pleasure tane the view 
Of rarest things, and royalcourts of kings, 
Hée stayde his course, and so returned home, 
Where such as beare his absence, but withgriefe, 
I meane his friendsand nearest companions, 
Did gratulate his safetie with kinde words, 
And in their conference ofwhat befell, 
Touching his iourney through the world and ayre, 
They put forth questions ofAstrologie, 
VVhich Faustus answerd with such learned skill,  
As they admirde and wondred at his wit.  
Now is his fame spread forth in euery land,  
Amongst the rest the Emperour is one,  
Carolus the fift, at whose pallace now  
Faustus is feasted mongst his noble men.  
VVhat there he did in triall of his art,  
I leaue vntold, your eyes shall see performd.  
  
Exit.  

Enter Robin the Ostler with a booke in his hand  

O this is admirable! here I ha stolne one of doctor  
Faustus coniuring books, and ifaith I meane to search some  
circles for my owne vse: now wil I make al the maidens in  
our parish dance at my pleasure starke naked before me, and  
so by that meanes I shal see more then ere I felt, or saw yet.  

Enter Rafe calling Robin.  

Robin, prethee come away, theres a Gentleman  
tarries to haue his horse, and he would haue his things rubd  
and made cleane: he keepes such a chafing with my mistris  
about it, and she has sent me to looke thée out, prethée come  
away.  

Keepe out, kéep out, or else you are blowne vp, you  
are dismembred Rafe, kéepe out, for I am about a roaring  
peece of worke.  

Come, what doest thou with that same booke thou  
canst not reade?  

Yes, my maister and mistris shal finde that I can  
reade, he for his forehead, she for her priuate study, shée’s  
borne to beare with me, or else my Art failes.  

Why Robin what booke is that?  

What booke? why the most intollerable booke for  
coniuring that ere was inuented by any brimstone diuel.  

Canst thou coniure with it?  

I can do al these things easily with it: first, I can  
make thée druncke with ’ipocrase at any taberne in Europe  
for nothing, thats one of my coniuring workes.  

Our maister Parson sayes thats nothing.  

True Rafe, and more Rafe, if thou hast any mind r  
to Nan Spit our kitchin maide, then turne her and wind hir  
to thy owne vse, as often as thou wilt, and at midnight.  

O braue Robin; shal I haue Nan Spit, and to mine  
owne vse? On that condition Ile feede thy diuel with horse=  
bread as long as he liues, of frée cost.  

No more swéete Rafe, letts goe and make cleane  
our bootes which lie foule vpon our handes, and then to our  
coniuring in the diuels name. 
  
exeunt.  

Enter Robin and Rafe with a siluer Goblet.  

Come Rafe, did not I tell thee, we were for euer  
made by this doctor Faustus booke? ecce signum, héeres a sim=  
ple purchase for horse­kéepers, our horses shal eate no hay as  
long as this lasts. 
  
enter the Uintner.  

But Robin, here comes the vintner.  

Hush, Ile gul him supernaturally: Drawer, I  
hope al is payd, God be with you, come Rafe.  

Soft sir, a word with you, I must yet haue a gob=  
let payde from you ere you goe.  

I a goblet Rafe, I a goblet? I scorne you: and you  
are but a &c. I a goblet? search me.  

I meane so sir with your fauor.  

How say you now?  

I must say somewhat to your felow, you sir.  

Me sir, me sir, search your fill: now sir, you may be  
ashamed to burden honest men with a matter of truth.  

Wel, tone of you hath this goblet about you.  

You lie Drawer, tis afore me: sirra you, Ile teach ye  
to impeach honest men: stand by, Ile scowre you for a goblet,  
stand aside you had best, I charge you in the name of Belza=  
bub: looke to the goblet Rafe.  

what meane you sirra?  

Ile tel you what I meane. 

He reades.  

Sanctobulorum Periphrasticon: nay Ile tickle you Vintner,  
looke to the goblet Rafe, Polypragmos Belyeborams framanto pa­ 
costiphos tostu Mephastophilis, &c.  

Enter Mephostophilis: sets squibs at their backes:  
they runne about.  

O nomine Domine, whatmeanst thou Robin thou? hast 
no goblet. 

Peccatum peccatorum, heeres thy goblet, good Vint= 
ner. 

Misericordia pro nobis, whatshal I doe? good diuel 
forgiue me now, and Ile neuer rob thy Library more. 

Enter to them Meph. 

Vanish vilaines, th one like an Ape, an other like 
a Beare, the third an Asse, for doing this enterprise. 
Monarch ofhel, vnder whose blacke suruey 
Great Potentates do kneele with awful feare, 
Vpon whose altars thousand foules do lie, 
How am I vexed with these vilaines charmes? 
From Constantinople am I hither come, 
Onely for pleasure of these damned slaues. 

How, from Constantinople? youhaue had a great 
iourney, wil you take sixe pence in your purse topay for your 
supper, and be gone? 

wel villaines, for your presumption, I transforme 
thée into an Ape, and thée into a Dog, and so begone. 

exit. 

How, into an Ape? thats braue, Ile haue fine sport 
with the boyes, Ile get nuts and apples enow.

And I must be a Dogge. 

exeunt.

Ifaith thy headwil neuer be out of the potage pot
. 
Enter Emperour, Faustus, and a Knight, with Attendants.
 
Maister doctor Faustus, I haueheard strangere= 
port of thy knowledge in the blacke Arte, how that none in my 
Empire, nor in the whole world can compare with thée, 
for the rare effects of Magicke: they say thou hast a familiar 
spirit, by whome thou canst accomplish what thou list, this 
therefore is my request that thou let me sée some proofe of thy 
skil, that mine eies may bewitnesses to confirme whatmine 
eares haue heard reported, and here I swearetothée, by the 
honor ofmine Imperial crowne, that what euerthou doest, 
thou shalt be no wayes preiudicedor indamaged. 

Ifaith he lookes much like a coniurer. aside. Fau. 
 
My gratious Soueraigne, though I must confesse  
my selfe farre inferior to the report men haue published, and  
nothing answerable to the honor of your Imperial maiesty,  
yet for that loue and duety bindes me therevnto, I am con=  
tent to do whatsoeuer your maiesty shall command me.  

Then doctor Faustus, marke what I shall say, As  
I was sometime solitary set, within my Closet, sundry  
thoughts arose, about the honour of mine auncestors, howe  
they had wonne by prowesse such exploits, gote such riches,  
subdued so many kingdomes, as we that do succéede, or they  
that shal hereafter possesse our throne, shal (I feare me) ne=  
uer attaine to that degrée of high renowne and great autho=  
ritie, amongest which kings is Alexander the great, chiefe  
spectacle of the worldes preheminence,  
The bright shining of whose glorious actes  
Lightens the world with his reflecting beames,  
As when I heare but motion made of him,  
It grieues my soule I neuer saw the man:  
If therefore thou, by cunning of thine Art,  
Canst raise this man from hollow vaults below,  
where lies intombde this famous Conquerour,  
And bring with him his beauteous Paramour,  
Both in their right shapes, gesture, and attire  
They vsde to weare during their time of life,  
Thou shalt both satisfie my iust desire,  
And giue me cause to praise thée whilst I liue.  

My gratious Lord, I am ready to accomplish your  
request, so farre forth as by art and power of my spirit I am  
able to performe.  

Ifaith thats iust nothing at all.  aside.  

But if it like your Grace, it is not in my abilitie to  
present before your eyes, the true substantiall bodies of those  
two deceased princes which long since are consumed to dust.  

I mary master doctor, now theres a signe of grace  
in you, when you wil confesse the trueth.  aside.  

But such spirites as can liuely resemble Alexander  
and his Paramour, shal appeare before your Grace, in that  
manner that they best liu’din, in theirmost florishing estate, 
which I doubt not shalsufficiently content your Imperiall maiesty. 

Go to maister Doctor, let me sée them presently. 

Do you heare maister Doctor? you bring Alexander 
and his paramourbefore the emperor? 

How then sir?  

Ifaith thats as true as Diana turnd me to a stag.  

No sir but when Acteon died, he left the hornes for  
you: Mephastophilis be gone. 

exit Meph. 

Nay, and you go to coniuring, Ile be gone. 

exit Kn:

Ile méete with you anone for interrupting me so: 
héere they are my gratious Lord. 

Enter Meph: with Alexander and his paramour. 

Maister Doctor, I heard this Ladywhile she liu’d 
had a wart or moale in her necke, how shal I know whether 
it be so or no? 

Your highnes may boldly go and sée. 

exit Alex: 

Sure theseare no spirites, but the true substantiall 
bodies ofthose two deceased princes. 

wilt please your highnes now to send for the knight 
that was so pleasant with me here of late?

One of you call him foorth. 
Enter the Knight with a paire of hornes on his head. 

How now sir Knight? why I had thought thou 
hadst beene a batcheler, but now I sée thou hast a wife, that 
not only giues thee hornes, but makes thée weare them, feele 
on thy head. 

Thou damned wretch, and execrable dogge, 
Bred in the concaue of some monstrous rocke: 
How darst thou thus abuse a Gentleman?
 Vilaine I say, vndo whatthou hast done. 

O not so fast sir, theres no hastebut good, are you 
remembred how you crossed mein my conference with the 
emperour? I thinke I hauemet with you for it. 

Good Maister Doctor, at my intreaty release him, 
he hath done penance sufficient. 

My gratious Lord, not so much for theiniury hée 
offred mehéere in your presence, as to delight you with some 
mirth, hath Faustus worthily requited this iniurious knight, 
which being all I desire, I amcontent to release him of his 
hornes: and sir knight, hereafter speake well of Scholers: 
Mephastophilis, transforme him strait. Now my good Lord 
hauing done my duety, I humbly take my leaue. 

Farewel maister Doctor, yet ere you goe,
expect from me a bounteous reward. 

exit Emperour. 

Now Mephastophilis, the restlesse course that time 
doth runne with calme and silent foote, 
Shortning my dayes and thredof vitall life, 
Calls for thepayment of my latest yeares, 
Therefore swéetMephastophilis, let vs make haste to Wer­
tenberge. 

what, wil you goe on horse backe, or on foote? 

Nay, til I am pastthis faire and pleasant gréene, ile 
walke on foote. 

enter a Horse­courser 

I haue béene al this day séeking one maister Fu= 
stian: masse sée where he is, God saue you maister doctor.

What horse­courser, you are wel met. 

Do you hearesir? I haue brought you forty dol= 
lers for your horse. 

I cannot sel him so: if thoulikst him for fifty, take 
him. 

Alas sir, I haue no more, I pray you speake for me.

I pray you let him haue him, he is an honest felow, 
and he has a great charge, neither wife nor childe.

Wel, comegiue me your money, my boy wil deli= 
uer him to you: but I must tel you one thing beforeyou haue 
him, ride him not into thewater at any hand. 

why sir, wil henot drinke of all waters? 

O yes, he wil drinke of al waters, but ride him not 
into the water, ride him ouerhedge or ditch, or where thou 
wilt, but not into thewater. 

Wel sir, Now am I made man for euer, Ile not 
leaue my horse for fortie: if he had but the qualitie of hey 
ding, ding, hey, ding, ding, Ide make a braue liuing on him; 
hée has a buttocke as slicke as an Ele: wel god buy sir, your 
boy wil deliuer himme: but hark ye sir, if my horse be sick, or 
ill at ease, if I bring his water toyou youle tel me what it is? 

Exit Horsecourser. 

Away you villaine: what, doost thinke I am a horse= 
doctor? what art thou Faustus but a man condemnd to die? 
Thy fatalltime doth drawe to finall ende, 
Dispaire doth driue distrust vnto my thoughts, 
Confound thesepassions with a quiet sléepe: 
Tush, Christ did call the thiefe vpon the Crosse, 
Then rest thée Faustus quiet in conceit. 

Sleepe in his chaire. 

Enter Horsecourser all wet, crying. 

Alas, alas, Doctor Fustian quoth a, mas Doctor 
Lopus was neuer such a Doctor, has giuen me a purgation, 
has purg’d me of fortie Dollers, I shall neuer sée them more: 
but yet like an asse as I was, I would not be ruled by him, 
for he bade meI should ride him into no water; now, I thin= 
king my horse had had some rare qualitie that he would not 
haue had me knowne of, I like a ventrous youth, rid himin= 
to the deepe pond at the townes ende, I wasno sooner in the 
middle of the pond, but my horse vanisht away, and I sat vp= 
on a bottle of hey, neuer so neare drowning in my life: but 
Ile séeke out my Doctor, and haue my fortie dollers againe, 
or Ile make it the dearest horse: O yonder is his snipper 
snapper, do you heare? you, hey, passe, where’s your 
maister? 

why sir, whatwould you? you cannot speake 
with him. 

But I wil speake with him. 

Why hée’s fast asléepe, comesome othertime. 

 Ile speake with him now, or Ile breake his glasse= 
 windowes about his eares. 

I tell thee he has not slept this eight nights. 

And hehaue not slept this eight wéekes Ile speake with him. 

Sée where he is fast asléepe. 

I, this ishe, God saue ye maister doctor, maister 
doctor, maister doctor Fustian, fortie dollers, fortie dollers 
for a bottle of hey. 

Why, thou seest he heares thée not. 

So, ho, ho: so, ho, ho. 

Hallow in his eare. 

No, will you not wake? Ile make you wake ere I goe.
 
Pull him by the legge, and pull it away. 

Alas, I am vndone, whatshall I do: 

O my legge, my legge, helpe Mephastophilis, call the 
Officers, my legge, my legge. 

Come villaine to the Constable. 

O Lordsir, let me goe, and Ile giue you fortie dol= 
lers more. 

Where bethey? 

I haue none about me, come to my Oastrie and Ile 
giue them you. 

Be gone quickly. 

Horsecourser runnes away. 

What is he gone? farwel he, Faustus has his legge 
againe, and the Horsecourser I take it, a bottle of hey for his 
labour; wel, this tricke shal cost him fortie dollers more.
 
Enter Wagner. 

How now Vagner, what’s the newes with thée? 

Sir, theDuke of Vanholt dothearnestly entreate 
your company. 

The Duke of Vanholt! an honourable gentleman, 
to whom I must be no niggard of my cunning, come Me­
phastophilis, let’s away to him. 

exeunt. 

Enter to them the Duke, and the Dutches, 
the Duke speakes. 

Beléeue me maisterDoctor, this merrimenthath much pleased me. 

My gratious Lord, I amglad it contents you so 
wel: but it maybe Madame, youtake no delight in this, I 
haue heard that great bellied women do long for some dain= 
ties or other, whatis it Madame? tell me, and you shal haue 
it. 

Thankes, good maister doctor, 
And for I sée your curteous intentto pleasure me, I wil not 
hide from you the thing my heartdesires, and were it nowe 
summer, as it isIanuary, and the dead time of the winter, I 
would desire no better meate then a dish of ripe grapes. 

Alas Madame, thats nothing, Mephastophilis, be 
gone: 

exit Meph. 

were it a greater thing then this, so 
it would content you, you should haue it
 
enter Mephasto: with the grapes

here they be madam, wilt please you taste
on them. 

Beléeue me master Doctor, this makes me wonder 
aboue the rest, that being in the dead time of winter, and in 
the month of Ianuary, how you shuld come by thesegrapes. 

If it like your grace, the yéere is diuided into twoo 
circles ouer the wholeworlde, that when it is héere winter 
with vs, inthe contrary circle it is summer withthem, as in 
India, Saba, and farther countries inthe East, and by means 
of a swift spiritthat I haue, I had thembrought hither, as ye 
see, how do you like them Madame, be they good? 

Beléeue me Maister doctor, they be the best grapes  
that ere I tasted in my life before. 

I am glad they content you so Madam. 

Come Madame, let vs in, where you must wel re= 
ward this learned manfor the great kindnes he hath shewd 
to you. 

And so I wil my Lord, and whilst I liue, 
Rest beholdingfor this curtesie. 

I humbly thanke your Grace.  

Come, maister Doctor follow vs, and receiue your  
reward.  

exeunt. 

enter Wagner solus.
  
Wag.  I thinke my maister meanes to die shortly,  
For he hath giuen to me al his goodes, 
And yet me thinkes, if that deathwere néere, 
He would not banquet, and carowse, and swill 
Amongst the Students, as euen now he doth, 
who are at supper with such belly­cheere, 
As Wagner nere beheld in all his life. 
Séewhere they come: belikethe feast is ended. 

Enter Faustus with two or three Schollers 

Maister Doctor Faustus, since our conference a= 
bout faire Ladies, which was the beutifulst in all the world, 
we haue determined with our selues, that Helen of Greece 
was the admirablest Lady that euer liued: therefore master 
Doctor, if you wil do vs that fauor, as to let vs sée that péere= 
lesse Dame of Greece, whome al the world admires for ma= 
iesty, wée should thinke our selues much beholding vnto 
you. 

Gentlemen, for that I know your friendship is vn= 
fained, and Faustus custome isnot to denie theiust requests 
of those that wish himwell, you shall behold that pearelesse 
dame of Greece, no otherwaies for pompeand maiestie, then 
when sir Paris crost the seas with her, and broughtthe spoiles 
to rich Dardania. Be silentthen, for danger is in words. 

Musicke sounds, and Helen passeth ouer the Stage.  

Too simple is my wit to tell her praise,  
Whom all the world admires for maiestie.  

No maruel tho the angry Greekes pursude  
With tenne yeares warre the rape of such a quéene,  
Whose heauenly beauty passeth all compare.  

Since we haue séene the pride of natures workes,  
And onely Paragon of excellence, Enter an  
Let vs depart, and for this glorious déed old man.  
Happy and blest be Faustus euermore.  

Gentlemen farwel, the same I wish to you.  

Exeunt Schollers.  

Ah Doctor Faustus, that I might preuaile,  
To guide thy steps vnto the way of life,  
By which swéete path thou maist attaine the gole  
That shall conduct thée to celestial rest.  
Breake heart, drop bloud, and mingle it with teares,  
Teares falling from repentant heauinesse  
Of thy most vilde and loathsome filthinesse,  
The stench whereof corrupts the inward soule  
With such flagitious crimes of hainous sinnes,  
As no commiseration may expel,  
But mercie Faustus of thy Sauiour swéete,  
Whose bloud alone must wash away thy guilt.  

Where art thou Faustus? wretch what hast thou  
Damnd art thou Faustus, damnd, dispaire and die, (done?  
Hell calls for right, and with a roaring voyce  
Sayes, Faustus come, thine houre is come,  
And Faustus will come to do thée right. 
  
Mepha. giues him a dagger.
 
Ah stay good Faustus, stay thy desperate steps,  
I sée an Angell houers ore thy head,  
And with a violl full of precious grace,  
Offers to powre the same into thy soule,  
Then call for mercie and auoyd dispaire.  
Ah my swéete friend, I féele thy words  
To comfort my distressed soule, 
Leaue me a while to ponder on my sinnes. 

I goe swéete Faustus, but with heauy cheare, 
fearing the ruine of thy hopelesse soule. 

Accursed Faustus, whereis mercie now? 
I do repent, and yet I do dispaire: 
Hell striues withgrace for conquest in my breast, 
What shal I do to shun the snares of death? 

Thou traitor Faustus, I arrest thy soule 
For disobedience to my soueraigne Lord, 
Reuolt, or Ile in peece­mealeteare thy flesh. 

Sweete Mephastophilis, intreate thy Lord 
To pardon my vniust presumption, 
And with my blood againe I wil confirme 
My former vow I madeto Lucifer. 

Do it then quickely, with vnfained heart, 
Lest greater danger do attend thy drift. 

Torment sweetefriend, that base and crooked age, 
That durst disswade me from thy Lucifer, 
With greatest torments that our hel affoords. 

His aith is great, I cannot touch his soule, 
But what I may afflicthis body with, 
I wil attempt, which is but little worth. 

One thing, good seruant, letme craue of thée 
To glut the longing of my hearts desire, 
That I might haue vnto my paramour, 
That heauenly Helen which I saw of late, 
Whose swéete imbracings may extinguish cleane 
These thoughts s that do disswade me from my vow, 
And kéepe mineoath I made to Lucifer. 

Faustus, this, or what else thou shalt desire, 
Shalbe performde in twinckling of an eie. 

enter Helen. 

Was this theface that lancht a thousand shippes? 
And burnt the toplesse Towres of Ilium? 
Swéete Helen, make me immortall with a kisse: 
Her lips suckes forth my soule, see whereit flies:  
Come Helen, come giue mée my soule againe. 
Here wil I dwel, for heauen be in these lips, 
And all is drosse that is not Helena: enter old man 
I wil be Pacis, and for loue ofthée, 
Instéede of Troy shal Wertenberge be sackt, 
And I wil combate with weake Menelaus, 
And weare thy colours on my plumed Crest: 
Yea I wil wound Achillis in the héele, 
And then returne to Helen for a kisse. 
O thou art fairer then the euening aire, 
Clad in the beauty ofa thousand starres, 
Brighter art thou then flaming Iupiter, 
When he appeard to haplesse Semele, 
More louely then the monarke of the skie 
In wanton Arethusaes azurde armes, 
And none but thou shalt be my paramour. 

Exeunt. 

Accursed Faustus, miserableman, 
That from thy soule excludst the grace of heauen, 
And fliest the throne of his tribunall seate, 

Enter the Diuelles. 
Sathan an begins to sift me with his pride, 
As in this furnace God shal try my faith, 
My faith, vile hel, shal triumph ouer thée, 
Ambitious fiends, sée how theheauens smiled 
At your repulse, and laughsyour state to scorne, 
Hence hel, for hence I flie vnto my God. 

Exeunt. 

Enter Faustus with the Schollers. 

Ah Gentlemen! 

what ailes Faustus? 

Ah my swéete chamber­fellow! had I liued with 
thée, then had I liued stil, but now I die eternally: looke, 
comes he not? comes he not? 

what meanes Faustus? 

Belike he is growne into some sickenesse, by F
being euer solitary. 

If it be so, wéele haue Physitians tocure him, 
tis but a surffet, neuer feare man. 

A surffet of deadly sinne that hath damnd both body and soule. 

Yet Faustus looke vp to heauen, remember gods 
mercies are infinite. 

But Faustus offence can nere be pardoned, 
The Serpent that tempted Eue may be sau’d, 
But not Faustus: Ah Gentlemen, heare me with patience, 
and tremble not at my spéeches, thoughmy heart pants and 
quiuers to remember that I hauebeene a studenthere these 
thirty yéeres, O would I had neuer séene Wertenberge, ne= 
uer read booke: and what wonders I haue done, al Germany 
can witnes heaven, yea all the world, for which Faustus hath lost 
both Germany, and theworld, yea heauen it selfe, heauen the 
seate of God, thethrone of theblessed, thekingdome of ioy, 
and must remaine in hel for euer, hel, ah hel for euer, sweete 
friends, whatshall become of Faustus, being in hel foreuer? 

Yet Faustus call on God. 

On God whome Faustus hathabiurde, on God, 
whome Faustus hath blasphemed, ahmy God, I woulde 
weepe, but thediuel drawes in my teares gush forth bloud 
insteade of teares, yea lifeand soule, Oh he stayes my tong, 
I would lift vp my hands, but see, theyholdthem, they hold 
them. 

Who Faustus? 

Lucifer and Mephastophilis. 
Ah Gentlemen! I gaue them my soule for my cunning. 

God forbid. 

God forbade it indéede, but Faustus hathdone it: 
for vaine pleasure of 24. yeares, hathFaustus lost eternall 
ioy and felicitie, I writ them a bill with mine owne bloud, 
the date is expired, thetime wil come, and he wil fetch mee. 

why did not Faustus tel vs of this before, that 
Diuines might haue prayed for thee? 

Oft haue I thought to haue done so, but the diuell 
threatned toteare mée inpéeces, if I namde God, to fetch 
both body and soule, if I once gaue eare to diuinitie: and 
now tis too late: Gentlemen away, lest you perish with me. 

O what shal we do to Faustus? 

Talke not of me, but saueyour selues, and de= 
part. 

God wil strengthen me, I wil stay with Fau= 
stus. 

Tempt not God, swéete friend, but let vs into the 
next roome, and there pray for him. 

I pray for me, pray for me, and what noyse soeuer 
yée heare, come not vnto me, for nothing can rescue me. 

Pray thou, and we wil praythat God may haue 
mercy vpon thée. 

Gentlemen farewel, if I liue til morning, Ile visite 
you: if not, Faustus isgone to hel.

Faustus, farewel. 

Exeunt Sch. 

The clocke strikes eleauen. 

Ah Faustus, 
Now hast thou but one bare hower to liue, 
And thenthou must be damnd perpetually: 
Stand stil you euer moouing spheres of heauen,
That time may cease, and midnightneuer come: 
Faire Natures eie, rise, rise againe, and make 
Perpetuall day, orlet this houre be but a yeere, 
A moneth, a wéeke, a naturall day, 
That Faustus may repent and saue his soule, 
O lente lente curite noctis equi: 
The starres mooue stil, time runs, the clocke wil strike, 
The diuel wil come, and Faustus must bedamnd. 
O Ile leape vp to my God: who pulles me downe? 
See see where Christs blood streames in the firmament, 
One drop would saue my soule, halfe a drop, ah my Christ, 
Ah rend not my heartfor namingof my Christ, 
Yet wil I call on him, oh spare me Lucifer! 
Where is it now? tis gone: 
And see where God stretcheth out his arme, 
And bends his irefull browes: 
Mountaines and hilles, come come, and fall on me, 
And hide me from theheauy wrath of God. 
No no, then wil I headlongrunne into the earth: 
Earth gape, O no, itwil not harbour me: 
You starres that raignd atmy natiuitie, 
whose influence hath alotted death and hel, 
Now draw vp Faustus like a foggy mist, 
Into the intrailes of yon labring cloude, 
That when you vomite foorth into the ayre, 
My limbes may issue fromyour smoaky mouthes, 
So that my soule may but ascend to heauen: 
Ah, halfe the houre is past: 

The watch strikes. 

Twil all be past anone: 
Oh God, if thou wilt not hauemercy on my soule, 
Yet for Christs sake, whose bloud hath ransomd me, 
Impose some end to my incessant paine, 
Let Faustus liue in hel a thousand yeeres, 
A hundred thousand, and at last be sau’d. 
O no end is limited to damned soules, 
Why wert thou not a creature wanting soule? 
Or, why is this immortall that thou hast? 
Ah Pythagoras metem su cossis were that true, 
This soule should flie from me, and I be changde 
Vnto some brutish beast: al beasts are happy, for when they 
Their soules are soone dissolud in elements, (die, 
But minemust liue still to be plagde in hel: 
Curst be the parents that ingendred me: 
No Faustus, curse thy selfe, curse Lucifer, 
That hath depriude thée of theioyes of heauen: 

The clooke striketh twelue. 

O it strikes, it strikes, now body turne to ayre, 
Or Lucifer wil beare thée quicke to hel: 
Thunder and lightning. 
Oh soule, be changde into little water drops, 
And fal into the Ocean, nere be found: 
My God, my God, looke not so fierce on me: 

Enter diuels. 

Adders, and Serpents, let me breathe a while: 
Vgly hell gape not, come not Lucifer, 
Ile burne my bookes, ah Mephastophilis.

exeunt with him 

Enter Chorus. 

Cut is the branch that might haue growne ful straight, 
And burned is Apolloes Laurel bough, 
That sometime grew within this learned man: 
Faustus is gone, regard his hellish fall, 
Whose fiendful fortunemay exhort the wise, 
Onely to wonder at vnlawful things, 
whose deepenesse doth intise such forward wits, 
To practise more than heauenly power permits. 

Terminat hora diem, Terminat Author opus. 





